The socialists and interventionists call entrepreneurial
profit, interest on capital, and rent of land "unearned" because they
consider that only the toil and trouble of the worker is real and worthy
of being rewarded. I3owever, reality does not reward toil and trouble.
If toil and trouble is expended according to well-conceived plans, its
outcome increases the means available for want-satisfaction. Whatever
some people may consider as just and fair, the only relevant question
is always the same. What alone matters is which system of social
organization is better suited to attain those ends for which people are 
3 94 Human Action
ready to expend toil and trouble. The question is market economy, or
socialism? Thcre is no third solution. The notion of a market economy
with nonmarket prices is absurd. The vcry idea of cost prices is unrealizable.
Even if the cost price formula is applied only to entrepreneurial
profits, it paralyzes the market. If commodities and services
are to be sold below the price the market would have dctcrmined for
them, supply always Jags behind demand. Then the market can
neither determine w-hat should or should not be produced, nor to
whom the commodities and services should go. Chaos results.
This refers also to monopoly prices. It is reasonable to abstain from
all policies which could result in the emergence of monopoly prices.
But whether monopoly prices are brought about by such promonopoly
government policies or in spite of the absence of such policies,
no allkged "fact finding" and no armchair speculation can discover
another price at which demand and supply would become equal. The
failure of a11 experiments to find a satisfactory solution for the limitedspace
monopoly of public utilities clearly proves this truth.
It is the very essence of prices that they are the offshoot of the
actions of individuals and groups of individuals acting on their own
behalf. The catallactic concept of exchange ratios and prices precludes
anything that is the effect of actions of a central authority, of people
resorting to violence and threats in the name of society or the state
or of an armed pressure group. In declaring that it is not the business
of the government to determine prices, we do not step beyond the
borders of logical thinking. A government can no more determine
prices than a goose can lay hen's eggs.
We can think of a social system in which there are no prices at all,
and we can think of government decrees which aim at fixing prices at
a height different from that w-hich the market would determine. It is
one of the tasks of economics to study the problems implied. However,
precisely because we want to examine these problems it is necessary
clearly to distinguish between prices and government decrees.
Prices are by definition determined-by peoples' buying and selling
or abstention from buying and selling. They must not be confused with
fiats issued by governments or other agencies enforcing their orders
by an apparatus of coercion and compulsi~n.~~
25. In order not to confuse the reader by the introduction of too many new terms, we shall keep to the widespread usage of calling such fiats prices, interest
rates, wage sates decreed and enforced by governments or other agencies of compulsion
(eg., labor unions). But one must never lose sight of the fundamental
difference between the market phenomena of prices, wages, and interest rates on the one hand, and the legal phenomena of maximum or minimum prices, wages,
and interest rates, designed to nullify these market phenomena, on the other
hand. 
XVII. INDIRECT EXCHANGE
I. Media of Exchange and Money
I STERPEKSONAL cxchange is called indircct exchange if, between the
commodities and services thc reciprocal exchange of which is the
ultimate end of exchanging, one or several media of exchange are interposed.
Thc subject matter of the theory of indirect cxchange is the
study of the ratios of exchange between the media of exchange on the
one hand and the goods and services of all orders on thc other hand.
The statements of the theory of indirect exchange refer to all instances
of indirect exchange and to all things which are employed as media of
cxchange.
A medium of exchange which is commonly used as such is called
money. The notion of money is vague, as its definition refers to the
vague term "commonly used." Therc are borderline cases in which
it cannot be decided whether a medium of exchange is or is not "commonly-"
used and should be called money. But this vaguencss in the
denotation of money in no way affects the cxactitude and precision
required by praxeological theory. For all that is to be predicated of
money is valid for every medium of exchange. It is therefore immaterial
whether one prescrves the traditional tcrm theory of money
or substitutes for it another tcrm. The theory of money was and is
always the theory of indirect exchangc and of the media of cxchange.1
2. Observations on Some Widespread Errors
Thc fateful errors of popular monetary doctrincs which have
Icd astray the monetary policies of almost all governments would
hardly have come into existence if many economists had not themselves
committed blunders in dealing with monctary issues and did not
stubbornly cling to them.
Thcrc is first of all the spurious idea of the supposed neutrality of
money.2 An outgrowth of this doctrine was the notion of the "level"
r. The theory of monetary calculation does not belong to the theory of in.
direct exchange. It is a part of the general theory of praxeology. 2. Cf. above, p. 203. Important contributions to the history and termindop
of this doctrine are provided by Hayek, Prices md Production (rev. ed. London,
19351, pp. 1 ff, 129 ff. 
396 Human Action
of prices that rises or falls proportionately with the increase or ciecrcasc
in the quantity of money in circulation. It was not realized that
changes in thc quantity of money can ncvcr effect the prices of all
goods and services at the same time and to thc same extent. Nor was
it realized that changes in the purchasing power of the monetary
unit are necessaril~ linked with changes in the mutual rclations between
tllose buying and sclling. In order to provc the doctrine that
the quantity of moncy and prices risc and fall proportionately, rccourse
was had in dealing with thc theory of money to a procedure
entirely different from that modern economics applies in dealing with
all its other problems. Instead of starting from the actions of individuals,
as catallactics must do without exception, formulas w-ere constructed
designed to comprehend thc whole of the market economy.
Elements of these formulas were: the total supply of money available
in the Volkswirtschaft; the volume of tradc-i.e., the money
equivalent of all transfers of conimoditics and scrvices as effected in
the Volkswirtschaft; the average velocity of circulation of the monetary
units: the level of prices. These formulas scemingly provided
evidence of the correctness of thc pricc lcvcl doctrine. In fact, however,
this whoIe mode of reasoning is a typical case of arguing in a
circle. For the equation of exchange already involves the level doctrines
which it tries to prove. It is essentiaily nothing but a rnathematical
expression of the-untenable-doctrine that there is proportionality
in the Inovcments of thc quantity of money and of prices.
Tn analyzing the equation of exchange one assumes that one of its
elements-total supply of money, volume of trade, velocity of circulation-changcs,
without asking how such changes ocdur. It is
not recognized that changes in these magnitudes do not emerge in
the Volkswirtschaft as such, but in the individual actors' conditions,
and that it is the interplay of the reactions of these actors that rcsults
in alterations of the pricc structure. The mathematical economists
refuse to start from the various individuals' demand for and
supplv of money. They introduce instead thc spurious notion of
velocity of circulation fashioned according to the patterns of mechanics.

There is at this point of our reasoning no need to deal with the
question of whether or not the mathematical economists are right in
assuming that the services rendered by money consist wholl\; or essentially
in its turnover. in its circulation. E& if this were true, it
w-ouId still be faulty to explain the purchasing power-the priceof
the monetary unit on the basis of its services. The services rendered
by water, whi&, and coffee do not explain the prices paid for these 
Indirect Exchange 3 97
things. What they explain is only why people, as far as they recognize
these services, under certain further conditions demand definite quantities
of these things. It is always demand that influences the price
structure, not the objective value in use.
It is true that with regard to money the task of catallactics is
broader than with regard to vendible goods. It is not the task of
catallactics, but of psychology and physiology, to explain why people
are intent on securing the services which the various vendible
commodities can render. Tt is a task of catallactics, however, to deal
with this question with regard to money. Catallactics alone can tel
us what advantages a man expects from holding money. But it is not
these expected advantages which determine the purchasing power
of money. The eagerness to secure these advantages is only one of
the factors in bringing about the demand for rnoncy. It is demand, a
subjective element whose intensity is entirely dcterrnined by value
judgments, and not any objective fact, any powcr to bring about a
certain effect, that plays a role in the formation of the market's exchange
ratios.
The deficiency of the equation of exchange and its basic elements
is that they look at market phenomena from a holistic point of view.
They are deluded by their prepossession with the Volkswirtschaft
notion. But whcre tlkre is, in the strict sense of the term, a Volksr
wirtschaft, there is neither a market nor prices and money. On a
market there are only individuals or groups of individuals acting in
concert. What motivates these actors is their own concerns, not those
of the whole market economy. If there is any sense in such notions
as volume of trade and velocity of circulation, then they refer to the
resultant of the individuals' actions. It is not permissible to resort to
these notions in order to explain the actions of the individuals. 'lh
first question that catallactics must raise with regard to changes in
the total quantity of money available in the market system is how
such changcs affect the vahous individuals' conduct. -~odern economics
does not ask what "iron" or "bread" is worth, but what a
definite piece of iron or of bread is worth to an acting individual at
a definite date and a definite place. It cannot help proceeding in the
same way with regard to money. The equation of exchange is incompatible
with the fundamental principles of economic thought.
It is a relapse to the thinking of ages in which people failed to comprehend
praxeological phenomena because they were committed to
holistic notions. It is stcrilc, as were the specularions of earlier ages
concerning the vaIuc of "iron" and "bread" in general.
The theory of money is an essential part of the catallactic theory. 
398 Human Action
It must be dealt with in the same manner which is applied to all other
cataIIactic problems.
3. Demand for h4oney and Supply of Money
In the marketability of the various commodities and scrvices there
prcvail considerable differences. There are goods for which it is not
difficult to find applicants ready to disburse the highest recompense
which, under the given state of affairs, can possibly be obtained, or
a recompense only slightly smaller. There are other goods for which
it is very hard to find a customer quickly, even if the vendor is ready
to be content with a compensation much smaller than hc could reap
if he could find another aspirant whose demand is more intense. It
is these differences in the marketability of the various commodities
and scrvices which created indirect exchange. A man who at the
instant cannot acquire what he wants to get for the conduct of his
own household or business, or who does not yet know what kind of
goods he will need in the uncertain future, comes nearer to his ultimate
goal if he exchanges a less markctable good he wants to trade
against a more marlwable one. It may also happen that the physical
properties of the merchandise he wants to give away (as, for instance,
its perishability or the costs incurred by its storage or similar circumstances)
impel him not to wait longer. Sometimes he may be prompted
to hurry in giving away the good concerned because he is afraid of
a deterioration of its market value. In all such cases he improves his
own situation in acquiring a more marketable good, even if this good
is not suitable to satisfy directly any of his own needs.
A medium of exchange is a good which people acquire neither for
their own consumption nor for employment in their own production
activities, but with the intention of exchanging it at a later date
against those goods which they want to use either for consumption
or for production.
Money is a medium of exchange. It is the most marketable good
which people acquire because they want to offer it in later acts of
interpersonal exchange. Money is the thing which serves as the generally
accepted and commonly used medium of exchange. This is
its only function. All the other functions which people ascribe to
money are merely particular aspects of its primary and sole function,
that of a medium of e~change.~
Media of exchange are economic goods. They are scarce; there is
3. Cf. Mises, The Theory of Money and Credit, trans, by H. E. Batson (London
and New York, 1934), pp. 34-37. 
Indirect Exchange 3 99
a demand for them. There are on the rnarkct people who desire to
acquire them and are ready to exchange goods and services against
them. Media of exchange have value in exchange. People make sacrifices
for their acquisition; they pay "prices" for them. The peculiarity
of these prices lies merely in the fact that they cannot be expressed
in terms of money. In reference to thc vendible goods and services
we speak of prices or of money prices. In reference to money we
speak of its purchasing power with regard to various vendible goods.
There exists a demand for media of exchange because people want
to keep a store of them. Every member of a rnarkct society wants to
have a definite amount of money in his pocket or box, a cash holding
or cash balance of a definite height. Sometimes he wants to keep a
larger cash holding, sometimes a smaller; in exceptional cases he may
even renouncc any cash holding. At any rate, the immense majority
of peoplc aim not only to own various vendible goods; they want no
less to hold money. Their cash holding is not merely a residuum, an
unspent margin of their wealth. It is not an unintentional remainder
left over after all intentiqnal acts of buying and selling havc been
consummated. Its amount is determined by a deliberate demand for
cash. And as with all othcr goods it is the changes in the relation
between demand for and supply of money that bring about changes
in the exchange ratio between money and the vendible goods.
Every piece of money is owned by one of the members of the
market economy. The transfer of money from the control of one
actor into that of another is temporally immediate and continuous.
There is no fraction of time in between in which the money is not a
pare of an individual's or a firm's cash holding, but just in "circulation."
It is unsound to distinguish between circulating and idle
money. It is no lcss faulty to distinguish bctween circulating money
and hoarded money. What is called hoarding is a height of cash
holding which-according to the personal opinion of an observerexceeds
what is deemed normal and adequate. However, hoarding
is cash holding. Hoarded money is sciil money and it serves in the
hoards the same purposes which it serves in cash holdings caIled normal.
He who hoards money believes that some special conditions make
it expedicnt to accumulate a cash holding which exceeds the amount
he himself would keep under different conditions, or other people
keep, or an economist censuring his action considers appropriate.
That he acts in this way influences the configuration of the demand
4. Money can be in the process of transportation, it can travel in trains, ships,
or planes from one place to another. But it is in this case, too, always subject to
control. 
400 Human Action
for money in the same way in which every "normal" demand influences
it.
Many economists avoid applying the terms demand and supply
in the sense of demand for and supply of money for cash hoIding
because they fear a confusion with the current terminology as used
by the bankers. It is, in fact, customary to call demand for money
the demand for short-term loans and supply of money the supply
of such loans. Accordingly one calls the market for short-term loans
the moncy market. One says money is scarce if there prevails a
tendency toward a rise in the rate of interest for short-term loans,
and one says money is plentiful if the rate of interest for such loans is
decreasing. These modes of speech are so firmly entrenched that it
is out of the question to venture to discard them. But they have
favored the spread of fateful errors. They made people confound the
notions of money and of capital and believe that increasing the
quantity of money could lower the rate of interest lastingly. But it is
preciseiy the crassness of thcsc errors which makes it unlikely that
the terminology suggested could create any misunderstanding. It is
hard to assume that economists could err with regard to such fundamental
issues.
Ofhers maintained that one should not speak of the demand for and
supply of money because the aims of those demanding money differ
from the aims of those demanding vendible commodities. Commodities,
they say, are demanded ultimately for consumption, while money
is demanded in ordcr to be given away in further acts of exchange.
This objection is no less invalid. The use which pcopIe make of a
medium of exchange consists eventually in its being given away. But
first of all they are eager to accumulate a certain amount of it in order
to be ready for the moment in which a purchase may be accomplished.
Precisely because people do not want to provide for their own needs
right at thc instant at which they give away the goods and services
they themselves bring to the market, precisely because they want to
wait or are forced to wait until propitious conditions for buying appear,
they barter not directly but indirectly through the interposition
of a medium of cxchange. The fact that money is not worn out
by the use one makes of it and that it can render its services practically
for an unlimited length of time is an important factor in the configuration
of its supply. But it does not alter the fact that the appraisement
of money is to he explained in the same way as the appraisement of
a1 other goods: by the demand on the part of those who are eager
to acquire a definite quantity of it.
Economists have tried to enumerate the factors which within the 
Indirect Exchange 401
whole economic system may ilcrease or decrease the demand for
money. Such factors are: the population figure; the extent to which
the individual households provide for their own needs by autarkic
production and the extent to which they produce for other people's
needs, selling their products and buying for thcir own consumption
on the market; thc distribution of business activity and the settlement
of payments over the various seasons of the year; institutions for the
settlement of claims and counterclaims by mutual cancellation, such
as clearinghouses. All these factors indeed influence the demand for
money and the height of the various individuals' and firms' cash
holding. But they influence them only indirectly by the role they
play in the considerations of people concerning the determination of
the amount of cash balances they deem appropriate. What decides
thc matter is always the value judgments of the nien concerned. The
various actors make up their minds about what they believe the
adequate height of thcir cash holding should be. They carry out
their resolution by renouncing the purchase of commodities, securities,
and interest-bearing claims, and by selling such assets or conversely
by increasing their purchases. With money, things are not
different from what they are with regard to all other goods and services.
The demand for money is determined by the conduct of people
intent upon acquiring it for their cash holdink.
Another objection raised against the notion of the demand for
money was this: The marginal utility of the money unit decreases
much more slowly than that of the other commodities; in fact its
decrease is so slow that it can be practically ignored. With regard to
money nobody ever says that his demand is satisfied, and nobody ever
forsakes an opportunity to acquire more money provided the sacrifice
required is not too great. It is therefore impermissible to consider the
demand for money as limited. The very notion of an unlimited demand
is, however, contradictory. This popular reasoning is cntirely
fallacious. It confounds the demand for money for cash holding with ., the desire for more wealth as expressed in terms of money. He who
says that his thirst for more money can never be quenched, does
not mean to say that his cash holding can never be too large. What
he really means is that he can never be rich enough. If additional
money flou7s into his hands, he will not use it for an increase of his
cash balance or he will use only a part of it for this purpose. He will
expend the surplus either for instantaneous consumption or for investment.
Nobody ever keeps more money than hc wants to have as
cash holding.
Thc insight that the exchange ratio between money on the one 
402 Human Action
hand and the vendible commodities and services on the other is determined,
in the same way as the mutual cxchange ratios between the
various vendible goods, by demand and supply was the essence of the
quantity theory of money. This thcory is essentially an application of
the general theory of supply and demand to the special instance of
money. Its merit was the endcavor to explain the determination of
money's purchasing power by resorting to the same reasoning which
is cmployed for the explanation of all other exchange ratios. Its shortcorning
was that it resorted to a holistic interpretation. It looked at
the total supply of money in the Volkswirtschaft and not at the
actions of thc individual men and firn~s. An outgrowth of this erroneous
point of view was the idea that there prevails a proportionality
in the changes of the-total-quantity of money and of moncy prices.
But the older critics failed in their attempts to explode the crrors
inherent in the quantity theory and to substitute a more satisfactory
theory for it. They did not fight what was wrong in the quantity
theory; they attacked, on the contrary, its nucleus of truth. They
were intent upon denying that there is a causal relation between the
movements of prices and those of the quantity of moncy. This denial
led them into a labyrinth of errors, contradictions, and nonsense.
Modern monetary theory takes up the thread of the traditional quantity
theory as far as it starts from the cognition that changes in the
pu-rchasing power of money must be dealt with according to the
principles applied to all other market phenomena and that there
exists a connection between the changes in the demand for and
supply of money on the one hand and those of purchasing power on
the other. In this sense one may call the modcrn theory of monev an
improved variety of the quantity theory.
The Epistemological Import of Carl Menger's Theory
of the Origin of Money
Carl Menger has not only provided an irrefutable praxeological theory
of the origin of money. He has also recognized the import of his theory
for the elucidation of fundamental principles of praxeology and its
methods of research.5
There were authors who tried to explain the origin of moncy by decree
or covenant. The authority, the state, or a compact between citizens has
purposively and consciously established indirect exchangc and moncy. The
main deficiency of this doctrine is not to be seen in the assumption that
people of an age unfamiliar with indirect exchange and moncy could de-
5. Cf. Carl Menger's books Grundsiitze der Volkswirtschaftslehre (Vienna,
1871). pp. 25off.; ibid. (2d ed. Vienna, 19231, pp. 241 ff.; Untersuchungen iiber
die Methode der Sozialwissenschaften (I,eipzig, 188j), pp. 171 ff. 
Indirect Exchange
sign a plan of a new economic order, entirely different from the real conditions
of their own age, and could comprehend the importance of such a
plan. Neither is it to be seen in the fact that history does not afford a clue
for the support of such statements. There are more substantial reasons for
rejecting it.
If it is assumed that the conditions of the parties concerned are improved
by every step that leads from direct exchange to indirect exchange and
subsequently to giving preference for use as a medium of exchangc to certain
goods distinguished by their especiaIly high marketability, it is difficult
to conceive why one should, in dealing with the origin of indirect exchange,
resort in addition to authoritarian decree or an explicit compact
between citizens. A man who finds it hard to obtain in direct barter what
he wants to acquire renders better his chances to acquire what he is asking
for in later acts of exchange by the procurement of a more marketable
good. Under these circumstances there was no need of government interference
or of a compact between the citizens. The happy idea of proceeding
in this way could strikc the shrewdest individuals, and the less resourceful
could imitate the former's method. It is certainly more p1ausibIe to take
for granted that the immediate advantages conferred by indirect exchange
were recognized by the acting parties than to assume that the whole image
of a society trading by means of money was conceived by a genius and, if
we adopt the covenant doctrine, tnade obvious to the rest of the people
by persuasion.
If, however, we do not assume that individuals discovered the fact that
they fare better through indirect exchangc than through waiting for an
opportunity for direct exchange, and, for the sake of argument, admit that
the authorities or a compact introduced money, further questions are
raised. We must ask what kind of measures were applied in order to induce
people to adopt a procedure the utiiity of which they did not comprehend
and which was technically more complicated than direct exchange. We
may assume that compulsion was practiced. But then we must ask, further,
nt what time and by what occurrences indirect exchange and the use of
money later ceased to be procedures troublesome or at least indifferent to
the individuals concerned and became advantageous to them.
The praxeological method traces all phenomena back to the actions of
individuais. if conditions of interpersonal exchange are such that indirect
exchange facilitates the transactions, and if and as far as people realize these
advantages, indirect exchange and money come into being. Historical experience
shows that these conditions were and are present. How, in the
absence of these conditions, people could have adopted indirect exchange
and money and clung to these modes of exchanging is inconceivable.
The historical question concerning the origin of indirect exchange and
money is after all of no concern to praxeology. The only relevant thing is
that indirect exchange and money exist because the conditions for their
existence werc and are present. If this is so, praxeology does not need to
resort to the hypothesis that authoritarian decree or a covenant invented 
404 Hunzan Action
these modes of exchanging. The ktatists may if they like continue to ascribe
the "invention" of money to the state, however unlikely this may be. What
matters is that a man acquires a good not in order to consume it or to use
it in production, but in order to give it away in a further act of exchange.
Such conduct on the part of people makes a good a medium of exchange
and, if such conduct beconles common with regard to a certain good, makes
it money. All theorems of the catallactic theory of media of exchange and
of money refer to the services which a good renders in its capacity as a
medium of exchange. Even if it were true that the impulse for the introduction
of indirect exchange and money was provided by the authorities
or by an agreement between the members of society, the statement remains
unshaken that only the conduct of exchanging people can create indirect
exchange and money.
History may tell us where and when for the first time media of exchange
came into use and how, subsequently, the range of goods employed for this
purpose was more and more restricted. As the differentiation between the
broader notion of a medium of exchange and the narrower notion of
money is not sharp, but gradual, no agreement can be reached about the
historical transition from simple media of exchange to money. This is a
matter of historical understanding. But, as has been mentioned, the distinction
between direct exchange and indirect exchange is sharp and everything
that catallactics establishes with regard to media of exchange refers
categorially to all goods which are demanded and acquired as such media.
As far as the statement that indirect exchange and money were established
by decree or by covenant is meant to be an account of historical
events, it is the task of historians to expose its falsity. As far as it is advanced
merely as a historical statement, it can in no way affect the catallactic
theory of money and its explanation of the evolution of indirect exchange.
But if it is designed as a statement about human action and social events, it
is useless because it states nothing about action. It is not a statement about
human action to declare that one day rulers or citizens assembled in convention
were suddenly struck by the inspiration that it would be a good
idea to exchange indirectly and through the intermediary of a commonly
used ~nedium of exchange. It is merely pushing back the problem involved.
It is necessary to comprehend that one does not contribute anything to
the scientific conception of human actions and social phenomena if one
declares that the state or a charismatic leader or an inspiration which descended
upon all the people have created them. Neither do such statements
refute the teachings of a theory showing how such phenomena can be
aclrnowledged as "the unintentional outcome, the resultant not deliberately
designed and aimed at by specifically individual endeavors of the members
of a society."
6. Cf. hknger, Untersuchungen, LC., p. 178. 
Indirect Exchange 405
4. The Determination of the Purchasing Powcr of Money
As soon as an economic good is demanded not only by those who
want to use it for consumption or production, but also by people
who want to keep it as a medium of exchange and to give it away
at need in a later act of exchange, the demand for it increases. A new
employment for this good has emerged and creates an additional
demand for it. As with every other economic good, such an additional
demand brings about a rise in its value in exchange, i.e., in the quantity
of other goods which are offered for its acquisition. The amount of
other goods which can be obtained in giving away a medium of exchange,
its "price" as expressed in terms of various goods and services,
is in part determined by the demand of those who want to acquire
it as a medium of exchange. If people stop using the good in question
as a medium of exchange, this additional specific demand disappears
and the "price" drops concomitantly.
Thus the dernand for a medium of exchange is the composite of
two partial demands: the demand displayed by the intention to use
it in consumption and production and that displayed by the intention
to use it as a medium of ~xchange.~ With regard to modern metalIic
money one speaks of the industrial demand and of the monetary demand.
The vaIue in exchange (purchasing power) of a medium of
exchange is the resultant of the cumulative effect of both partial demands.

Now the extent of that part of the demand for a medium of exchange
which is displayed on account of its service as a medium of
exchange depends on its value in exchange. This fact raises difficulties
which many economists considered insoluble so that they abstained
from following farther along this line of reasoning. It is illogical, they
said, to explain the purchasing pourer of money by reference to the
demand for money, and the demand for money by reference to its
purchasing power.
The difficulty is, however, merely apparent. The purchasing power
which we explain by referring to the extent of specific demand is not
the same purchasing power the height of which determines this
specific demand. The problem is to conceive the determination of the
purchasing power of the immediate future, of the impending moment.
For the solution of this problem we refer to the purchasing
pourer of the immediate past, of the moment just passed. These are
7. The problems of money exclusively dedicated to the service of a medium of
exchange and not fit to render any other services on account of which it would
be demanded are dealt with beIow in section 9. 
406 Human Action
two distinct magnitudes. It is erroneous to object to our theorem,
which may be called the regression theorem, that it moves in a
vicious circle.*
But, say the critics, this is tantamount to merely pushing back the
problem. For now one must still explain the determination of yesterday's
purchasing power. If one explains this in the same way by
referring to the purchasing power of the day before yesterday and
so on, one slips into a regmsus in infinitzdnz. This reasoning, they assert,
is certainly not a complete and logically satisfactory solution
of the problem involved. What these critics fail to see is that the
regression does not go back endlessly. It reaches a point at which the
explanation is completed and no further question remains unanswered.
If we trace the purchasing power of money back step by step, we
finally arrive at the point at which the service of the good concerned
as a medium of exchange begins. At this point yesterday's exchange
vaIuc is exclusively determined by the nonmonetary-industrialdemand
which is displayed only by those who want to use this good
for other employments than that df a medium of exchange.
But, the critics continue, this means explaining that part of money's
purchasing power which is due to its service as a medium of exchange
by its employment for industria1 purposes. The very probIem,
the explanation of the specific monetary component of its exchange
value, remains unsolved. Here too the critics are mistaken. That
component of money's vaIue which is an outcome of the services
it renders as a medium of exchange is entirely explained by reference
to these specific monetary services and the demand they create. Two
facts are not to be denied and are not denied by anybody. First, that
the demand for a medium of exchange is determined by considerations
of its exchange value which is an outcome both of the monetary and
the industrial services it renders. Second, that thc exchange value of
3 good which has not yet been demanded for service as a medium of
exchange is determined solely by a demand on the part of people
eager to use it for industrial purposes, ix., either for consumption or
for production. Now, the regression theorem aims at interpreting the
8. The present writer first developed this regression theorem of purchasing
power in the first edition of his book Theory of Money and Credit, published in
1912 (pp. 97-123 of the English-language translation). His theorem has been
criticized from various points of view. Some of the objections raised, especially
those by B. Ail. Anderson in his thoughtful book The Value of Noney, first published
in 1917 (cf. pp. loo ff. of the 1936 edition), dcscrve a very careful examination.
The importance of the problems involved makes it necessary to weight also
the objections of H. Ellis (German Monetary TI~eory ZYOJ-~Y~~ [Cambridge,
19341, pp. 77 ff.). In the text above, all objections raised are particularized and
critically examined. 
Indirect Exchange 407
first emergence of a monetary demand for a good which previously
had been demanded exclusively for industrial purposes as influenced
by the exchange value that was ascribed to it at this moment on account
of its nonmonetary services only. This certainly does not involve
explaining the specific monetary exchange value of a medium
of exchange on the ground of its industrial exchange value.
Finally it was objected to the regression theorem that its approach
is historical, not theoretical. This objection is no less mistaken. To
explain an event historically means to show how it was produced by
forces and factors operating at a definite date and a definite place.
These individual forces and factors are the ultimate elements of the
interpretation. They are ultimate data and as such not open to any
further analysis and reduction. To explain a phenomenon theoretica11y
means to trace back its appearance to the operation of general rules
which are already comprised in the theoretical system. The regression
theorem complies with this requirement. It traces the specific exchange
value of a medium of exchange back to its function as such a
medium and to the theorems concerning the process of valuing and
pricing as developed by the general catallactic theory. It deduces
a more special case from the rules of a more universal theory. It
shows how the special phenomenon necessarily emerges out of the
operation of the rules generally valid for all phenomena. It docs not
say: This happened at that timc and at that place. It says: This always
happens when the conditions appear; whenever a good which has
not been demanded previously for the employment as a medium of
exchange, begins to be demanded for this employment, the same
effects must appear again; no good can be employed for the function
of a medium of exchange which at the very beginning of its use for
this purpose did not have exchange value on account of other employments.
And all these statements implied in the regression theorem
are enounced apodictically as implied in the apriorism of praxeology.
It mst happen this way. Nobody can ever succeed in constructing
a hypothetical case in which things were to occur in a different way.
The purchasing power of money is determined by demand and supply,
as is the case with the prices of a11 vendible goods and services.
As action always aims at a more satisfactory arrangement of future
conditions, he who considers acquiring or giving away money is, of
course, first of all interested in its future purchasing power and the
future structure of prices. But he cannot form a judgment about the
future purchasing power of money otherwise than by looking at its
configuration in the immediate past. It is this fact that radically distinguishes
the determination of the purchasing power of money from 
408 Human Action
the determination of the mutual exchange ratios between the various
vendible goods and services. With regard to these latter the actors
have nothing else to consider than their importance for future tvantsatisfaction.
If a new commodity unheard of before is offered for
sale, as was, for instance, the case with radio sets a few decades ago,
the only question that matters for the individual is whether or not
the satisfaction that the new gadget will provide is greater than that
expected from those goods he would have to renounce in order to
buy the new thing. Knowledge about past prices is for the buyer
merely a means to reap a consumer's surplus. If he were not intent
upon this goal, he could, if nced be, arrange his purchases without
any familiarity with the market prices of the immediate past, which
are popularly callcd present prices. He could make value judgments
without appraisement. As has been mentioned already, the obliteration
of the memory of all prices of the past would not prevent the
formation of new exchange ratios between the various vendible things.
But if knowledge about money's purchasing power were to fade
away, the process of developing indirect exchange and media of exchange
would have to start anew. It wouId become necessary to
begin again with employing some goods, more marketable than the
rest, as media of exchange. The demand for these goods would increase
and would add to the amount of exchange value derived from
their industrial (nonmonetary) employmcnt a specific component due
to their new use as a medium of exchange. A value judgment is, with
reference to money, only possible if it can be based on appraisement.
The acceptance of a new kind of money presupposes that the thing
in question already has previous exchange value on account of the
scrviccs it can render directly to consumption or production. Ncither
a buyer nor a seller could judge the value of a monetary unit if hc had
no information about its exchange value-its purchasing power-in
the immediate past.
The relation between the demand for money and the supply of
money, which may be caiicd the money reiation, deterrnincs tile
height of purchasing power. Today's money relation, as it is shaped
on the ground of yesterday's purchasing power, determines today's
purchasing power. He who wants to increase his cash holding restricts
his purchases and increases his sales and thus brings about a tendency
toward falling prices. He who wants to reduce his cash holding
increases his purchases-either for consumption or for production
and investment-and restricts his sales; thus he brings about a tendency
toward rising prices.
Changes in the supply of money must necessarily alter the dis- 
Indirect Exchange 409
position of vendible goods as owned by various individuals and firms.
The quantity of money available in the whole market system cannot:
increase or decrease otherwise than by first increasing or decreasing
the cash holdings of certain individual members. Wc may, if we like,
assume that every member gets a share of the additional money right
at the momcnt of its inflow into the system, or shares in the reduction
of the quantity of money. But whether we assume this or not, the
final result of our demonstration will remain the same. This rcsult
will be that changes in the structure of prices brought about by
changes in the supply of money available in the cconomic system
ncvcr affect the prices of the various commodities and services to
the same extent and at the same date.
Let us assume that the government issues an additional quantity
of paper money. The government plans either to b~iy commodities
and services or to repay debts incurred or to pay interest on such
debts. However this may be, the treasury enters the market with an
additional demand for goods and services; it is now in a position to
buy more goods than it could buy before. The prices of the cornmodities
it buys rise. If the government had expended in its purchases
money collected by taxation, the taxpayers would have restricted
their purchases and, while the prices of the goods bought by the
government would have risen, those of other goods would have
dropped. But this fall in the prices of the goods the taxpayers used
to buy does not occur if the government increases the quantity of
money at its disposal without reducing the quantity of money in
the hands of the public. The prices of some commodities-viz., of
those the govcrnment buys-rise immediately, while those of the
other commoditics remain unaltered for the time being-. But the process
goes on. Those selling the conmodities asked for by the government
are now themselves in a position to buy more than they used previously.
The prices of the things these people are buying in larger
quantities therefore rise too. Thus the boom spreads from one group
of commodities and services to other groups until all prices and wage
rates have risen. The rise in prices is thus not synchronous with the
various commoditics and services.
When eventually, in the further course of the increase in the quantity
of money, all prices have risen, the rise does not affect the various
commodities and services to the same extent. For the process has
affected the material position of various individuals to different degrees.
While the process is under way, some peopIe enjoy the henefit
of higher prices for the goods or services they sell, while the prices
of the things they buy have not yet risen or have not risen to the same 
4'0 Human Action
extent. On the other hand, there are peopIe who are in the unhappy
situation of selling commodities and services whose prices have not
yet risen or not in the same degree as the prices of the goods they
must buy for their daily consumption. For the former the progressive
rise in priccs is a boon, for the latter a calamity. Besides, the debtors
are favored at the expense of the creditors. When the process once
comes to an end, the wealth of various individuals has been affected
in different ways and to different degrees. Some are enriched, some
impoverished. Conditions are no longer what they were before. The
new order of things results in changes in the intensity of demand for
various goods. The mutual ratio of the monev prices of the vendible
goods and services is no longer the same as before. The price structure
has changed apart from the fact that all prices in terms of money
have risen. The final prices to the establishment of which the market
tends after the effects of the increase in the quantity of monep havk
been fully consumn~ated are not equal to the previous final prices
multiplied by the same multiplier.
The main fault of the old quantity theory as well as the mathematical
economists' equation of exchange isvthat they have ignored
this fundamental issue. Changes in the supply of money must bring
about changes in other data too. The market system before and after
the inflow or outflow of a quantity of money is not merely changed
in that the cash holdings of the individuals and prices have increased
or decreased. There have been effected also changes in the reciprocal
exchange ratios bctwecn the various commodities and services which,
if one wants to resort to metaphors, are more adequately described
by the image of price revolution than by the misleading figure of
an elevation or a sinking of the price level.
We may at this point disregard the effects brought about by the
influence on the content of all defcrred payments as stipulated by
contracts. We will deal later with them and with the operation of
monetary events on consumption and production, investment in
capital goods, and accumulation and consumption of capital. But
even in setting asidc all these things, we must never forget that changes
in the quantity of money affect prices in an uneven way. It depends
on the data of each particular case at what moment and to what extent
the prices of the various commodities and services are affected.
In the course of a monetary expansion (inflation) the first reaction
is not only that the prices of some of them rise more quickly and more
steeply than others. It may also occur that some fall at first as they are
for the most part demanded by those groups whose interests are hurt.
Changes in the money relation are not onIy caused by governments 
Indirect Exchange 411
issuing additional paper money. An increase in the production of the
precious metals employed as money has the same effects although, of
course, other classes of the population may be favored or hurt by it.
Prices also rise in the same way if, without a corresponding reduction
in the quantity of money available, the demand for money falls because
of a general tendency toward a diminution of cash holdings.
The money expended additionally by such a "dishoarding" brings
about a tendency toward higher prices in the same way as that flowing
from the gold mines or from the printing press. Conversely, prices
drop when the supply of money falls (e.g., through a withdrawal of
paper money) or the demand for money increases (e.g., through a
tendency toward "hoarding," the keeping of greater cash balances).
The process is aIways uneven and by steps, disproportionate and
asymmetrical.
It could be and has been objected that the normal production of the
gold mines brought to the market may well entail an increase in the
quantity of money, but does not increase the income, still less the
wealth, of the owners of the mines. These people earn only their
"normal" income and thus their spending of it cannot disarrange
market conditions and the prevailing tendencies toward the establishment
of final prices and the equilibrium of the evenly rotating
economy. For them, the annual output of the mines does not mean
an increase in riches and does not impel them to offer higher prices.
They will continue to live at the standard at which they used to
live before. Their spending within these limits will not revolutionize
the market. Thus the normal amount of gold production, although
certainly increasing the quantity of money available, cannot put
into motion the process of depreciation. It is neutral with regard to
prices.
As against this reasoning one must first of all obscrve that within
a progressing economy in which population figures are increasing
and the division of labor and its corollary, industrial specialization,
are perfected, there prevaiis a tendency toward an increase in the
demand for money. Additional people appear on the scene and want
to establish cash holdings. The extent of economic self-sufficiency,
i.e., of production for the household's own needs, shrinks and peoplc
become more dependent upon the market; this will, by and large,
impel them to increase their holding of cash. Thus the price-raising
tendency emanating from what is called the "normal" gold production
encounters a price-cutting tendency emanating from the increased
demand for cash holding. However, these two opposite tendencies
do not neutralize each other. Both processes take their own 
412 Human Action
course, both result in a disarrangement of existing social conditions,
making some people richer, some people poorer. Both affect the prices
of various goods at different dates and to a different degree. It is true
that the rise in the prices of some commodities caused by one of these
processes can finally be compensated by the fall caused by the other
process. It may happen that at the end some or many prices come
back to their previous height. But this final result is not the outcome
of an absence of movements provoked by changes in the money relation.
It is rather the outcome of the joint effect of the coincidence of
two processes independent of each other, each of which brings about
alterations in the market data as well as in the material conditions of
various individuals and groups of individuals. The new- structure of
prices may not differ very much from the previous one. But it is
the resultant of two series of changes which have accomplished all
inherent social transformations.
The fact that the owners of gold mines rely upon steady yearly
proceeds from their gold production does dot cancel the newly
mined gold's impression upon prices. The owners of the mines talie
from the market, in exchange for the gold produced, the goods and
services required for their mining and the goods needed for their
consumption and their investments in other lines of production. If
they had not produced this amount of gold, prices would not have
been affected by it. It is beside the point that they have anticipated
the future yield of the mines and capitalized it and that they have
adjusted their standard of living to the expectation of steady proceeds
from the mining operations. The effects which the newly mined
gold exercises on their expenditure and on that of those people whose
cash holdings step by step it enters later begin only at the instant this
gold is available in the hands of the mine owners. If, in the expectation
of funire yields, they had expended money at an earlicr date and the
expected yield failed to appear, conditions would not differ from
other cases in which consumption was financed by credit based on
expectations not realized by later events.
Changes in the extent ofthe desired cash holding of various people
neutralize one another only to the extcnt that they are regularly recurring
and mutually connected by a causal reciprocity. Salaried
people and wage earners are not paid daily, but at certain pay days
for a period of one or several weeks. They do not pIan to keep their
cash holding within the period between pay days at the same level;
the amount of cash in their pockets declines with the approach of the
next pay day. On the other hand, the merchants who supply them
with the necessities of life increase their cash holdings concomitantly. 
Indirect Exchange 413
The two movements condition each other; there is a causal interdependence
between them which harmonizes them both with rcgard to
time and to quantitative amount. Neither the dealer nor his customer
lets himself be influenced by these recurrent fluctuations. Their
plans concerning cash holding as well as their business operations
and their spending for consumption respectively have the whole
period in view and take it into account as a whole.
It was this phenomenon that led economists to the image of a
regular circulation of money and to the tleglect of the changes in the
individuals' cash holdings. However, we are faced with a concatenation
which is limited to a narrow, neatly circumscribed field. Only
as far as the increase in the cash holding of one group of people is
ten~porally and quantitatively related to the decrease in the cash
holding of another group and as far as these changes are self-liquidating
within the course of a period which the members of both groups
consider as a whole in planning their cash holding, can thc neutralization
take place. Beyond this fieId there is no question of such a
neutralization.
5. The Problem of Hume and Mi11 and the Driving
Force of Money
Is it possibie to think of a state of affairs in which changes in the
purchasing power of money occur at the same time and to the same
extent with regard to all commodities and services and in proportion
to the changes effected in either the demand for or the supply of
money? In other words, is it possible to think of neutral money within
the frame of an economic system which does not correspond to the
imaginary construction of an evenly rotating economy? We may
call this pertinent question the problem of Hume and Mill.
It is uncontested that neither Ilume nor Mill succeeded in finding -
a positive answer to this question."^ it possible to answer it categorically
in the negative?
We imagine two systems of an evenly rotating economy A and B.
The two systems are independent and in no way connected with one
another. The two systems differ from one another only in the fact
that to each amount of money nz in A there corresponds an amount
n m in B, n being greater or smaller than I; we assume that there are
no deferred paynlents and that the money used in both systems serves
only monetary purposes and does not allow of any nonmonetary use.
Consequently the prices in the two systems are in the ratio I : n. Is it
9. Cf. Mises, Theory of Money and Credit, pp. 140-142. 
414 Human Action
thinkable that conditions in A can be altered at one stroke in such a
way as to make them entirely equivalent to conditions in B?
The answer to this question must obviously be in the negative. He
who wants to answer it in the positive must assume that a deus ex
nzacbina approaches every individual at the same instant, increases
or decreases his cash holding by multiplying it by n, and tells him that
henceforth he must multiply by n a11 price data which he employs in
his appraisements and calculations. This cannot happen without a
miracle.
It has been pointed out already that in the imaginary construction
of an evenly rotating economy the very notion of moncy vanishes
into an unsubstantial calculation process, self-contradictory and devoid
of any meaning.1 It is impossible to assign any function to indirect
exchange, media of exchange, and money within an imaginary
construction the characteristic mark of which is unchangeability and
rigidity of conditions.
Where there is no uncertainty concerning the future, there is no
need for any cash holding. As money must necessarily be kept by
people in their cash holdings, there cannot be any money. The use of
media of exchange and the keeping of cash holdings are conditioned
by the changeability of economic data. Money in itself is an element
of change; its existence is incompatible with the idea of a regular flow
of events in an evenly rotating economy.
Every change in the money relation alters-apart from its effects
upon deferred payments-the conditions of the individual members
of society. Some become richer, some poorer. It may happen that the
effects of a change in the demand for and supply of money encounter
the effects of opposite changes occurring by and large at the same
time and to the same extent; it may happen that the resultant of the
two opposite movements is such that no conspicuous changes in the
price structure emerge. But even then the efFects on the conditions
of the various individuals are not absent, Each change in the money
relation takcs its own course and produces its own particular effects.
If an inflationary movement and a deflationary one occur at the same
time or if an inflation is temporally followed by a deflation in such a
way that prices finally are not very much changed, the social consequences
of each of the two movements do not cancel each other. To
the social consequences of an inflation those of a deflation are added.
There is no reason to assume that all or even most of those favored by
one movement will be hurt by the second one, or vice versa.
Money is neither an abstract numthire nor a standard of value or
10. Cf. above, pp. 249-250. 
Indirect Exchange 4x5
prices. It is necessarily an economic good and as such it is valued and
appraised on its own merits, i.e., the services which a man expects
from holding cash. On the market there is always change and movemcnt.
Only because there are fluctuations is there money. Money is
an element of change not because it "circulates," but because it is
kept in cash holdings. Only because people expect changes about the
kind and extent of which thcy have no certain knowledge whatsoever,
do they keep money.
While money can be thought of only in a changing economy, it is
in itself an element of further changes. Every change in the economic
data sets it in motion and makes it the driving force of new changes.
Every shift in the mutual relation of the exchange ratios between the
various nonmonetary goods not only brings about changes in production
and in what is popularly called distribution, but also provokes
changes in the money relation and thus further changes. Nothing
can happen in the orbit of vendible goods without affecting the orbit
of money, and all that happens in the orbit of money affects the orbit
of commodities.
The notion of a neutral money is no less contradictory than that
of a money of stable purchasing power. Money without a driving
force of its own would not, as people assume, be a perfect
money; it would not bc moncy at all.
It is a popular fallacy to believe that perfect money should be
neutral and endowed with unchanging purchasing powcr, and that
the goal of monetary policy should he to realize this perfect money.
It is easy to understand this idea as a reaction against the stiIl more
popular postulates of the inflationists. But it is an excessive reaction,
it is in itself confused and contradictory, and it has worked havoc because
it was strengthened by an inveterate error inherent in the
thought of many philosophers and economists.
These thinkers are misled by the widespread belief that a state of
rest is more perfect than one of movement. Their idea of perfection
implies that no more perfect state can be thought of and consequently
that every change would impair it. The best that can be said of a
motion is that it is directed toward the attainment of a state of perfection
in which there is rest because every further movement would
lead into a less perfect state. Motion is seen as the absence of equilibrium
and full satisfaction, as a manifestation of trouble and want.
As far as such thoughts merely establish the fact that action aims at
the removal of uneasiness and ultimately at the attainment of fulI
satisfaction, they are well foundcd. But one must not forget that rest
and equilibrium are not only present in a state in which perfect con- 
416 Human Action
tentment has made people perfectly happy, but no less in a state in
which, although wanting in many regards, they do not see any means
of improving their condition. The absence of action is not only the
result of full satisfaction; it can no less be the corollary of the inability
to render things more satisfactory. It can mean hopelessness as well
as contentment.
With the real universe of action and unceasing change, with the
economic system which cannot be rigid, neither neutrality of money
nor stability of its purchasing power are compatible. A world of the
kind which the necessary requirements of neutral and stable money
presuppose would be a world without action.
It is therefore neither strange nor vicious that in the frame of such
a changing world money is neither neutral nor stable in purchasing
power. All plans to render money neutral and stable are contradictory.
Money is an element of action and consequentIy of change.
Changes in the money relation, it., in the relation of the demand for
and the supply of money, affect the exchange ratio between money
on the one hand and the vendible commodities on the other hand.
These changes do not affect at the same time and to the same extent
the prices of the various commodities and services. They consequently
affect the wealth of the various members of society in a different
way.
6. Cash-Induced and Goods-Induced Changes in
Purchasing Power
Changes in the purchasing power of money, i.e., in the exchange
ratio between money and the vendible goods and commodities, can
originate either from the side of money or from the side of the vendible
goods and commodities. The change in the data which provokes
them can either occur in the demand for and supply of money or in
the demand for and supply of the other goods and services. We may
accordingly distinguish between cash-induced and goods-induced
changes in purchasing power.
Goods-induced changes in purchasing power can be brought about
by changes in the supply of commodities and services or in the demand
for individual commodities and services. A general rise or fall
in the demand for a11 goods and services or the greater part of them
can be effected only from the side of money.
Let us now scritinize the social and economic consequences of
changes in the purchasing power of money under the following three
assumptions: first, that the money in question can only be used as 
Indirect Exchange 417
money-ix., as a medium of exchange-and can serve no other purpose;
second, that there is only exchange of present goods and no
exchange of present goods against future goods; third, that we disregard
the effects of changes in purchasing power on monetary calculation.

Under these assumptions a11 that cash-induced changes in purchasing
power bring about are shifts in the disposition of wealth among
different individuals. Some get richer, others poorer; some are better
supplied, others less; what some people gain is paid for by the loss of
others. It would, however, be impermissible to interpret this fact by
saying that total satisfaction remained unchanged or that, while no
changes have occurred in total supply, the state of total satisfaction
or of the sum of happiness has been increased or decreased by changes
in the distribution of wealth. The notions of total satisfaction or total
happiness are empty. It is impossible to discover a standard for comparing
the different degrees of satisfaction or happiness attained by
various individuals.
Cash-induced changes in purchasing power indirectly generate
further changes by favoring either the accumulation of additional
capital or the consumption of capital avaiIable. Whether and in what
direction such secondary effects arc brought about depends on the
specific data of each case. We shall deal with these important problems
at a later point.ll
Goods-induced changes in purchasing power are sometimes nothing
else but consequences of a shift of demand from somc goods to
others. If they are brought about by an increase or a decrease in the
supply of goods they are not merely transfers from some people to
other people. They do not mean that Peter gains what Paul has lost.
Some people mai become richer although nobody is impoverished,
and vice versa.
We may describe this fact in the following way: Let A and B be
two independent systems which are in no way connected with each
other. In both systcms the same kind of money is used, a money which
cannot be used for any nonmonetary purpose. Now we assume, as
case I, that A and B differ from each other only in so far as in B the
total supply of money is 12 nz, m being the total supply of money in
A, and thar to every cash holding of c and to every claim in terms
of money d in A there corresponds a cash holding of n c and a claim
of n d in B. In every other respect A equals B. Then we assume, as
case 2, that A and B differ from each other only in so far as in B the
total supply of a certain commodity r is n p, p being the total supply
11. Cf. below, Chapter XX. 
418 Human Actiofz
of this commodity in A, and that to every stock v of this commodity r
in A there corresponds a stock of n v in B. In both cases n is greater
than I. If we ask every individual of A whether he is ready to make
the slightest sacrifice in order to exchange his position for the corresponding
place in B, the answer will be unanimously in the negative
in case I. But in case z all owners of r and all those who do not own
any r, but are eager to acquire a quantity of it-i.e., at least one individual-will
answer in the affirmative.
The services money renders are conditioned by the height of its
purchasing power. Nobody wants to have in his cash holding a definite
number of pieces of money or a definite weight of money; he wants
to keep a cash holding of a definite amount of purchasing power. As
the operation of the market tends to determine the final state of
money's purchasing power at a height at which the supply of and
the dcmand for money coincide, there can never be an excess or a
deficiency of money. Each individual and all individuals together
always enjoy fully the advantages which they can derive from indirect
exchange and the use of money, no matter whether the total
quantity of money is great or small. Changes in money's purchasing
power generate changes in the disposition of wealth among the various
members of society. From the point of view of people eager to be
enriched by such changes, the supply of money may be called insufficient
or excessive, and the appetite for such gains may result in
policies designed to bring about cash-induced alterations in purchasing
power. However, the services which money renders can be
neither improved nor impaired by changing the supply of money.
There may appear an excess or a deficiency of money in an individual's
cash holding. But such a condition can be remedied by increasing
or decreasing consumption or investment. (Of course, one must
not fall prey to the popular confusion between the demand for money
for cash hilding and the appetite for more wealth.) The quantity of
money available in the whole economy is always sufficient to secure
for everybody all that money does and can do.
From the point of view of this insight one may call wasteful all
expenditures incurred for increasing the quantity of money. The
fact that things which could render some other useful services are
employed as money and thus withheld from these other employments
appears as a superfluous curtailment of Iimited opportunities for
want-satisfaction. It was this idea that led Adam Smith and Ricardo
to the opinion that it was very beneficial to reduce the cost of producing
money by resorting to the use of paper printed currency.
However, things appear in a different light to the students of mone- 
Indirect Exchange 419
tary history. If one looks at the catastrophic consequences of the
great paper money inflations, one must admit that the expensiveness
of gold production is the minor evil. It would be futile to retort that
these catastrophes were brought about by the improper use which
the governments made of the powers that credit money and fiat money
pIaced in their hands and that wiser governments would have adopted
sounder policies. As money can never be neutral and stable in purchasing
power, a government's plans concerning the determination
of the quantity of money can never be impartial and fair to all members
of society. Whatever a government does in the pursuit of aims
to influence the height of purchasing power depends necessarilv upon
the rulers' personal value judgments. It always furthers the interests
of some groups of people at the expense of other groups. It never
serves what is called the commonweal or the public weIfare. In the
field of monetary policies too there is no such thing as a scientifir
ought.
The choice of the good to be employed as a medium of exchange
and as money is never indifferent. It determines the course of the
cash-induced changes in purchasing power. The question is only
who should make the choice: the people buying and selling on the
market, or the government? It was the market w-hich in a selective
process, going on for ages, finally assigned to the precious metals
gold and silver the character of money. For two hundred years the
governments have interfered with the market's choice of the money
medium. Even the most bigoted Ctatists do not venture to assert that
this interference has proved beneficial.
Inflation and Deflation; Inflationism and Depntionism
The notions of inflation and deflation are not praxeological concepts.
They were not created by economists, but by the mundane speech of the
public and of politicians. They impIied the popular fallacy that there is such
a thing as neutral money or money of stabIe purchasing power and that
sound money should be neutral and stable in purchasing power. From this
point of view the term inflation was applied to signify cash-induced
changes resulting in a drop in purchasing power, and the term deflation to
signify cash-induced changes resulting in a rise in purchasing power.
However, those applying these terms are not aware of the fact that
purchasing power never remains unchanged and that consequently there
is always either inflation or deflation. They ignore these necessarily perpetual
fluctuations as far as they are only small and inconspicuous, and
reserve the use of the terms to big changes in purchasing power. Since the
question as to at what point a change in purchasing power begins to deserve
being called big depends on personal relevance judgments, it becomes 
420 Human Action
manifest that inflation and deflation are terms lacking the categorial
precision required for praxeoIogica1, economic, and catallactic concepts.
Their application is appropriate for history and politics. Catallactics is free
to resort to them only when applying its theorems to the interpretation of
events of economic history and of political programs. Moreover, it is very
expedient even in rigid catallactic disquisitions to make use of these two
terms whenever no misinterpretation can possibly result and pedantic
heaviness of expression can be avoided. But it is necessary never to forget
that all that catallactics says with regard to inflation and deflation-i.e., big
cash-induced changes in purchasing power-% valid also with regard to
small changes, although, of course, the consequences of smaller changes are
less conspicuous than those of big changes.
The terms inflationism and deflationism, inflationist and deflationist,
signify the poIitica1 programs aiming at inflation and deflation in the sense
of big cash-induced changes in purchasing power.
The semantic revolution which is one of the characteristic features of
our day has also changed the traditional connotation of the terms inflation
and deflation. What many people today call inflation or deflation is no
longer the great increase or decrease in the supply of money, but its inexorable
consequences, the general tendency toward a rise or a fall in commodity
prices and wage rates. This innovation is by no means harmless. It
plays an important role in fomenting the popular tehdencies toward inflationism.

First of all there is no longer any term available to signify what inflation
used to signify. It is impossible to fight a policy which you cannot name.
Statesmen and writers no longer have the opportunity of resorting to a terminology
accepted and understood by the public when they want to question
the expediency of issuing huge amounts of additional money. They
must enter into a detailed analysis and description of this policy with full
particulars and minute accounts whenever they want to refer to it, and
they must repeat this bothersome procedure in every sentence in which
they deal with the subject. As this policy has no name, it becomes selfunderstood
and a matter of fact. It goes on luxuriantly.
The second mischief is that those engaged in futile and hopeless attempts
to fight the inevitable consequences of inflation-the rise in prices-are
disguising their endeavors as a fight against inflation. While merely fighting
symptoms, they pretend to fight the root causes of the evil. Because
they do not comprehend the causal relation betw-een the increase in the
quantity of money on the one hand and the rise in prices on the other, they
practicalIy make things worse. The best example was provided by the subsidies
granted on the part of the governments of the United States, Canada,
and Great Britain to farmers. Price ceilings reduce the supply of the commodities
concerned because production involves a loss for the marginal
producers. To prevent this outcome the governments granted subsidies to
the farmers producing at the highest costs. These subsidies were financed
out of additional increases in the quantity of money. If the consumers had 
lndirect Exchange 42 1
had to pay higher prices for the products concerned, no further inflationary
effects would have emerged. The consumers would have had to use for
such surplus expenditure only money which had already been issued previously.
Thus the confusion of inflation and its consequences in fact can
directly bring about more inflation.
It is obvious that this new-fangled connotation of the terms inflation and
deflation is utterly confusing and misleading and must be unconditionally
rejected.
7. Monetary Calculation and Changes in Purchasing Power
Monetary calculation reckons with the prices of commodities and
services as they were determined or would have been determined
or presumably will be determined on the market. It is eager to detect
price discrepancies and to draw conclusions from such a detection.
Cash-induced changes in purchasing power cannot be taken into
account in such calculations. It is possible to put in the place of calculation
based on a definite kind of money a a mode of calculating
based on another kind of money b. Then the result of the calculation
is made safe against adulteration on the part of changes effected in
the purchasing power of a; but it can still be adulterated by changes
effected in the purchasing power of b. There is no means of freeing
any mode of economic calculation from the influence of changes in
the purchasing power of the definite kind of money on which it is
based.
All results of economic calculation and all conclusions derived
from them are conditioned by the vicissitudes of cash-induced changes
in purchasing power. In accordance with the rise or fall in purchasing
power there emerge between items reflecting earlier prices and those
reflecting later prices specific diffcrences; the calculus shows profits or
losses which are mercly produced by cash-induced changes effected
in the purchasing power of money. If we compare such profits or
losses with the result of 3 calculation accomplished on the basis of a
kind of money whose purchasing power had been subject to less
vehement changes, we can call them imaginary or apparent only.
But om must not forget that such statements are only possible as a
result of the comparison of calculations carried out in different kinds
of money. As there is no such thing as a money with stable purchasing
pourer, such apparent profits and losses are present with every
mode of economic calculation, no matter on what kind of money it
may be based. It is in~possible to distinguish precisely between genuine
profits and losses and merely apparent profits and losses.
It is therefore possible to maintain that economic calculation is 
422 Human Action
not perfect. However, nobody can suggest a method which could
free economic calculation from these defects or design a monetary
system which could remove this source of error entirely.
It is an undeniable fact that the free market has succeeded in developing
a currency system which well served all the requirements
both of indirect cxchange and of economic calculation. The aims of
monetary calculation are such that thcy cannot be frustrated by the
inaccuracies which stem from slow and comparatively slight movements
in purchasing power. Cash-induced changes in purchasing
power of the extent to which they occurred in the last two centuries
with metallic money, expecially with gold money, cannot influence
the result of the businessmen's economic calculations so considerably
as to render such calculations useless. Historical experience shows that
one could, for all practical purposes of the conduct of business, manage
very well with these methods of calculation. Theoretical consideration
shows that it is impossible to design, still less to realize, a
better method. In view of these facts it is vain to call monetary calculation
imperfect. Man has not the power to change the categories
of human action. He must adjust his conduct to them.
Businessmen never dcemed it necessary to free economic calculation
in terms of gold from its dependence on the fluctuations in purchasing
power. The proposals to improve the currency system by
adopting a tabular standard based on index numbers or by adopting
various methods of commodity standards were not advanced with
regard to business transactions and to monetary calculation. Their
aim was to provide a less fluctuating standard for long-run loan
contracts. Businessmen did not even consider it expedient to modify
their accounting methods in those regards in which it would have been
easy to narrow down certain errors induced by fluctuations in purchasing
power. It would, for instance, have been possible to discard
the practice of writing off durable equipment by means of yearly
depreciation quotas, invariably fixed in a percentage of the cost of
its acquisition. In its place one could resort to the device of laying
aside in renewal funds as much as seems necessary to provide the full
costs of the replacement at the time when it is required. But business
was not eager to adopt such a procedure.
All this is valid only with regard to money which is not subject
to rapid, big cash-induced changes in purchasing power. But money
with which such rapid and big changes occur loses its suitability to
serve as a medium of exchange altogether. 
lndirect Exchange
8. The Anticipation of Expected Changes in
Purchasing Power
The deliberations of the individuals which determine their conduct
with regard to money are based on their knowledge concerning
the prices of the immediate past. If they lacked this knowledge, they
would not be in a position to decide what the appropriate height
of their cash holdings should be and how much they should spend for
the acquisition of various goods. A medium of exchange without a
past is unthinkable. Nothing can enter into the function of a medium
of exchange which was not already previously an economic good and
to which people assigned exchange value already before it was demanded
as such a medium.
But the purchasing power handed down from the immediate past
is modified by today's demand for and supply of money. Human
action is always pr&iding for the future, be it sometimes only the
future of the impending hour. He who buys, buys for future consumption
and production. As far as he believes that the future will
differ from the present and the past, he modifies his vahation and
appraisement. This is no less true with regard to money than it is
with regard to all vendible goods. In this sense we may say that
today's exchange value of money is an anticipation of tomorrow's
exchange vaIue. The basis of all judgments concerning money is its
purchasing power as it was in the immediate past. But as far as cashinduced
changes in purchasing power are expected, a second factor
enters the scene, the anticipation of these changes.
He who believes that the prices of the goods in whkh he takes an
interest will rise, buys more of them than he would have bought in
the absence of this Lelief; accordingly he restricts his cash holding.
He who believes that prices will drop, restricts his purchases and thus
enlarges his cash holding. As long as such speculative anticipations
are limited to some commodities, they do not bring about a general
tende~lcy toward changes in cash holding. But it is different if people
believe that they are on the eve of big cash-induced changes in purchasing
power. When they expect that the money prices of all goods
will rise or fall, they expand or restrict their purchases. These attitudes
strengthen and accelerate the expected tendencies considerably.
This goes on until the point is reached beyond which no further
changes in the purchasing power of money are expected. Only then
does the inclination to buy or to sell stop and do people begin again
to increase or to decrease their cash holdings.
But if once public opinion is convinced that the increase in the 
424 Human Action
quantity of money will continue and never come to an end, and that
consequently the prices of all commodities and services will not
cease to rise, everybody becomes eager to buy as much as possible
and to restrict his cash holding to a minimum size. For under these
circumstances the regular costs incurred by holding cash are increased
by the losses caused by the progrcssivc fall in purchasing
power. The advantages of holding cash must be paid for by sacrifices
which are deemed unreasonably burdensome. 'JXs phenomenon was,
in the great European inflations of the 'twenties, called flight into real
goods (Flucht in die Sachwrte) or crack-up boom (Katastrophenhausse).
The mathematical economists are at a loss to comprehend
the causal relation between the increase in the quantity of money and
what they call "velocity of circulation."
The characteristic nark of the phenomenon is that the increase in
the quantity of money causes a fall in the demand for money. The
tendency toward a fail in purchasing power as generated by the increased
supply of money is intensified by the general propensity to
restrict cash holdings which it brings about. Eventually a point is
reached where the prices at which people would be prepared to part
with "real" goods discount to such an extent the expected progess
in the fall of purchasing poxvcr that nobody has a sufficient amount of
cash at hand to pay them. The monetary system breaks down; all
transactions in the money concerned cease; a panic makes its purchasing
power vanish altogether. People return either to barter or
to the use of another kind of money.
The course of a progressing inflation is this: At the beginning the
inflow of additional money makes the prices of some commodities
and services rise; other prices rise latcr. The price rise affects the
various commodities and services, as has been shown, at different
dates and to a different extent.
This first stage of the inflationary process may last for many years.
'LVhiIe it lasts, the prices of many goods and services are not yet adjusted
to the altered money relation. There are still people in the
country who have not yet become aw-are of the fact that they are
confronted with a price revohtion which will finaILy result in a
considerable rise of all prices, although the extent of this rise will not
be the same in the various commodities and services. These people
still belicve that prices one day will drop. Waiting for this day, they
restrict their purchases and concomitantly increase their cash holdings.
As long as such ideas are still held by pubIic opinion, it is not
yet too late for the government to abandon its inflationary policy.
But then finally the masses wake up. They become suddenly aware 
Indirect Exchange 425
of the fact that inflation is a deliberate policy and will go on endlessly.
A breakdown occurs. Thc crack-up boom appears. Everybody
is anxious to swap his money against "real" goods, no matter
whether he needs them or not, no matter how much money he has to
pay for them. Within a very short time, within a few weeks or even
days, the things which were used as money are no longer used as ~nedia
of exchange. They become scrap paper. Sobody wants to give away
anything against them.
It was this that happened with the Continental currency in America
in 1781, with the French mandats teuitoriaux in I 796, and with the
German Mark in I 92 3. It will happen again whenever the same conditions
appear. If a thing has to be used as a medium of exchange, public
opinion must not believe that thc quantity of this thing will increase
beyond all bounds. Inflation is a policy that cannot last forever.
9. The Specific Value of Money
As far as a good used as money is valued and appraised on account
of the services it renders for nonmonetary purposes, no problems are
raised which would require special treatment. The task of the theory
of money consists merely in dealing with that component in the
valuation of money which is conditioned by its function as a medium
of exchange.
In the course of history various commodities have been employed
as media of exchange. A long evolution eliminated the greater part
of these commodities from the monetary function. Only two, the
precious metals gold and silver, remained. In the second part of the
nineteenth century more and more governments deliberately turned
toward the demonetization of silver.
In a11 these cases what is employed as money is a commodity which
is used also for nonmonetary purposes. Cnder the gold standard gold
is money and money is gold. It is immaterial whether or not the laws
assign legal tender jualjty only to gold coins minted by the government.
What counts is tht these coins really contain a fixed weight
of gold and every quantit). of bullion can freely be transformed into
coins. Under the gold sta~hard the dollar and the pound sterling were
merely names for a definite weight of gold, within very narrow margins
precisely determined by the laws. We may call such a sort of
money commodity money.
A second sort of money is credit money. Credit money evolved
out of the use of money-substitutes. It was cuscomary to use claims,
payable on demand and absolutely secure, as substitutes for the sum 
426 Hurnan Action
of money to which they gave a claim. (We shall deal with the features
and problems of money-substitutes in the next section.) The market
did not stop using such claims when one day their prompt redemption
was suspendcd and thereby doubts about their safety and the
solvency of the obligee were raised. As long as these claims had been
daily maturing claims against a debtor of undisputed solvency and
could be collected without notice and free of expense, their exihange
value was equal to their face value; it was this perfect equivalcnce
which assigned to them the character of moncy-substitutes. Now,
as redemption was suspended, the maturity date postponed to an
undetermined day, and consequently doubts about the solvency of
the debtor or at least about his willingness to pay cmerged, they lost
a part of the value previously ascribed to them. They were now
merely claims, which did not bear interest, against a questionable
debtor and falling due on an undefined day. But as they were used as
media of exchange, their exchange value did not drop to the level
to which it would have dropped if they were merely claims.
One can fairly assume that such credit money could remain in use
as a medium of exchange even if it were to lose its character as a
claim against a bank or a treasury, and thus would become fiat money.
Fiat money is a moncy consisting of mere tokens which can neither
be employed for any industrial purposes nor convey a claim against
anybody.
It is not a task of catallactics but of economic history to investigate
whether there appeared in the past specimens of fiat money or whether
all the sorts of money which were not commodity money were credit
money. The only thing that catallactics has to establish is that the
possibility of the existence of fiat money must be admitted.
The important thing to be remembered is that with every sort
of money, demonetization-i.e., the abandonment of its use as a
medium of exchange-must result in a serious fall of its exchange
value. What this practically means has become manifest when in the
last eighty years the use of silver as commodity money has been progressively
restricted.
There are specimens of credit money and fiat money which are
embodied in metallic coins. Such money is printed, as it were, on
silver, nickel, or copper. If such a piece of fiat moncy is demonetized,
it still retains exchange value as a piece of metal. But this is only a
very small indemnification of the owner. It has no practical importance.

The keeping of cash hoIding requires sacrifices. To the extent that
a man keeps money in his pockets or in his balance with a bank, he 
Indirect Exchange 42 7
forsakes the instantaneous acquisition of goods he could consume or
employ for production. In the market economy these sacrifices can
be precisely determined by calculation. They are equal to the amount
of originary interest he would have earned by investing the sum. The
fact that a man takes this falling off into account is proof that he
prefers the advantages of cash holding to the loss in interest yield.
It is possible to specify the advantages which people expect-from
keeping a definite amount of cash. But it is a delusion to assume that
an analysis of these motives could provide us with a theory of the
determination of purchasing power which could do without the
notions of cash holding and demand for and supply of money.12 The
advantages and disadvantages derived from cash holding are not
objective factors which could directly influence the size of cash
holdings. They are put on the scales by each individual and weighed
against one another. The result is a subjective judgment of value,
colored by the individual's personality. Different people and the
same people at different times value the same objective facts in a different
way. Just as knowledge of a man's wealth and his physical condition
does not tell us how much he would be prepared to spend for
food of a certain nutritive power, so knowledge about data concerning
a man's material situation does not enable us to make definite
assertions with regard to the size of his cash holding.
10. The Import of the Money Relation
The money relation, i.e., the relation between demand for and
supply of money, uniquely determines the price structure as far
as the reciprocal exchange ratio between money and the vendible
commodities and services is involved.
If the money relation remains unchanged, neither an inflationary
(expansionist) nor a deflationary (contractionist) pressure on trade,
business, production, consumption, and employment can emerge. The
assertions to the contrary reflect the grievances of people reluctant to
adjust their activities to the demands of their fellow men as manifested
on the market. However, it is not an account of an alleged
scarcity of money that prices of agricultural products are too low to
secure to the submarginal farmers proceeds of the amount they would
like to earn. The cause of these farmers' distress is that other'farmers
are producing at lower costs. What is wrong with British manufacturing
is not that the "level" of prices is too low, but the fact that
12. Such an attempt was made by Greidanus, The Value of Money (London,
'932), pp. '97 ff. 
428 Human Action
they did not succeed in raising the productivity of the capital invested
and the men employed to a height that would provide all the
goods the British want to consume.
An increase in the quantity of goods produced, other things being
unchanged, must bring about an improvement in people's conditions.
Its consequence is a fall in the money prices of the goods the
production of which has been increased. But such a fall in money
prices does not in the lcast impair the benefits derived from the additional
wealth produced. One may consider as unfair the increase in
the share of the additional wealth which goes to the creditors, although
such criticisms are questionable as far as the rise in purchasing
power has been correctly anticipated and adequately taken into
account by a negative price premium.':' But one must not say that a
fall in prices caused by an increase in the production of the goods
concerned is the proof of some disequilibrium which cannot be
eliminated otherwise than by increasing the quantity of money. Of
course, as a rule every increase in production of some or of all commodities
requires a new allocation of factors of production to the
various branches of business. If the quantity of money remains unchanged,
the necessity of such a reallocation becomes visible in the
price structure. Some lines of production become more profitable,
while in others profits drop or losscs appear. Thus the operation of
the market tends to eliminate these much discussed disequilibria. It
is possible by means of an increase in the quantity of money to delay
or to interrupt this process of adjustment. It is impossible either to
make it superfluous or less painful for those concerned.
If the government-made cash-induced changes in the purchasing
power of money resulted only in shifts of wealth from some people
to other people. it would riot be permissible to condemn them from
the point of view of catallactics' scientific neutrality. It is obviously
fraudulent to justify them under the pretext of the commonweal or
public welfare. But one could still consider them as political measures
suitable to promote the interests of some groups of people at the expense
of others without further detriment. However, there are still
other things involved.
It is not necessary to point out the consequences to which a continued
deflationary policy must lead. Nobody advocates such a
policy. The favor of the masses and of the wkters and politicians
eager for applause goes to infiation. With regard to these endeavors
we must emphasize three points. First: Inflationary or expansionist
13- About the relations of the market rate of interest and changes in purchasing
power, cf. below, Chapter XX. 
Indirect Exchange 42 9
policy must result in overconsumption on the one hand and in malinvestment
on the other. It thus squanders capital and impairs the
future state of want-satisfaction.14 Second: The inflationary process
does not remove the necessity of adjusting production and reallocating
resources. It merely- postpones it and thereby makes it
more troublesome. Third: Inflation cannot be employed as a permanent
policy because it must, when continued, finally result in a
breakdown of the monetary system.
A retailer or innkeeper can easily fall prey to the illusion that a11
that is needed to make him and his colleagues more prosperous is more
spending on the part of the public. In his eyes the main thing is to
impel people to spend more. But it is amazing that this belief could be
presented to the world as a new social philosophy. Lord Keynes and
his disciples make the lack of the propensity to consume responsible
for what: they deem unsatisfactory in economic conditions. What is
needed, in their eyes, to make men more prosperous is not an increase
in production, but an increase in spending. In order to make it possible
for people to spend more, an "expansionist" policy is recommended.
This doctrine is as old as it is bad. Its analysis and refutation will be
undertaken in the chapter dealing with the trade cycle.15
I I. The Money-Substitutes
Claims to a definite amount of money, payable and redeemable on
demand, against a debtor about whose solvency and willingness to
pay there does not prevail the slightest doubt, render to the individuaI
all the services money can render, provided that all parties with whom
he could possibly transact business are perfectly familiar with these
essential qualities of the claims concerned: daily maturity and undoubted
solvency and willingness to pay on the part of the debtor.
We may call such cIaims money-substitutes, as they can fully replace
money in an individual's or a firm's cash holding. The technical
and legal features of the money-substitutes do not concern catallactics.
A money-substitute can be embodied eirher in a banknote or in a demand
deposit with a bank subject to check ("checkbook money" or
deposit currency), provided the bank is prepared to exchange the
note or the deposit daily free of charge against money proper. Token
coins are also money-substitutes, provided the owner is in a position
to exchange them at need against money free of expense and without
delay. To achieve this it is not required that the government be
14. Cf. below, pp. 561-562.
15. Cf. below, pp. 545-562. 
430 Human Action
bound by law to redeem them. What counts is the fact that these
tokens can be really convcrted free of expense and without delay.
If the total amount of token coins issued is kept within reasonable
limits, no special provisions on the part of the government are necessary
to keep their exchange value at par with their facc value. The
demand of the public for small change gives everybody the opportunity
to exchange them easily against pieces of money. The main thing
is that every owner of a moncy-substitute is perfectly certain that it
can, at every instant and free of expense, be exchanged against money.
If the debtor-the government or a bank-keeps against the whole
amount of money-substitutes a reserve of money proper, we call the
moncy-substitute a money-certificate. The individual money-certificate
is-not necessarily in a lcgal sense, but always in the catallactic
sense-a representative of a corresponding amount of money kept
in the reserve. The issuing of money-certificates does not increase the
quantity of things suitable to satisfy the demand for money for cash
holding. Changes in the quantity of money-certificates therefore do
not alter the supply of money and the money relation. Thcy do not
play any role in the determination of the purchasing power of money.
If the money reserve kcpt by the debtor against the money-substitutes
issued is less than the total amount of such substitutes, we call
that amount of substitutes which exceeds the rescrve fiduciary media.
As a rule it is not possible to ascertain whether a concrete specimen
of money-substitutes is a money-certificate or a fiduciary medium. A
part of the total amount of money-substitutes issued is usually covcred
by a money reserve held. Thus a part of the total amount of moneysubstimtcs
issued is money-certificates, the rest fiduciary media. But
this fact can only be recognized by those familiar with the bank's
balance sheets. The individual banknote, deposit, or token coin does
not indicate its catallactic character.
The issue of money-certificates does not increase the funds which
the bank can crnploi in the conduct of its lending business. A bank
which does not issue fiduciary media can only grant commodity
credit, ie., it can only lend its own funds and the amount of money
which its customers have entrustcd to it. The issue of fiduciary media
enlarges the bank's funds available for lending beyond these limits.
It can now not only grant commodity credit, but also circulation
credit, i.e., credit granted out of the issue of fiduciary media.
While the quantity of money-certificates is indifferent, the quantity
of fiduciary media is not. The fiduciary media affect the market
phenomena in the same way as money does. Changes in their quantity 
Indirect Exchange 43 1
influence the determination of money's purchasing power and of
prices and-temporarily--also of the rate of interest.
Earlier economists applied a different terminology. Many were prepared
to call the money-substitutes simply money, as they are fit
to render the services money renders. However, this terminology
is not expedient. The first purpose of a scientific terminoIogy is to
facilitate the analysis of the problerns involved. The task of the catallactic
theory of money-as differentiated from the legal theory and
from the technical disciplines of bank management and accountancy
-is the study of the problems of the determination of prices and interest
rates. This task requires a sharp distinction between moneycertificates
and fiduciary media.
The term credit expansion has often been ~nisinterpreted. It is
important to realize that con~modity credit cannot be expanded. The
only vehicle of credit expansion is circulation credit. But the granting
of circulation credit does not always mean credit expansion. If
the amount of fiduciary media previously issued has consummated
all its effects upon the market, if prices, wage rates, and interest rates
have been adjusted to the total supply of money proper plus fiduciary
media (supply of money in the broader sense), granting of circulation
credit without a further increase in the quantity of fiduciary media
is no longer credit expansion. Credit expansion is present only if credit
is granted by the issue of an additional amount of fiduciary media,
not if banks lend anew fiduciary media paid back to them by the
old debtors.
12. The Limitation on the Issuance of Fiduciary Media
People deal with money-substitutes as if they were money because
they are fully confident hat it will bc pssibie to exchange them at
any time without delay and without cost against money. We may
call those who share in this confidence and are therefore ready to
deal with money-substitutes as if they were money, the clients of the
iss~~ing banker, bank, or authority. It does not matter whether or not
this issuing establishment is operated according to the patterns of
conduct customary in the banking business. Token coins issued by
a country's treasury are money-substitutes too, although the treasury
as a rule does not enter the amount issued into its accounts as a
liability and does not consider this amount a part of the national
debt. It is no Iess immaterial whether or not the owner of a moneysubstitute
has an actionable claim to redemption. What counts is 
432 Human Action
whether the money-substitute can reaIly be exchanged against money
without delay and cost.16
Issuing money-certificates is an expensive venture. The banknotes
must be printed, the token coins minted; a compIicated accounting
system for the deposits must be organized; the reserves must be kept
in safety; then there is the risk of being cheated by counterfeit banknotes
and checks. Against all these expenses stands only the slight
chance that some of thc banknotes issued may be destroyed and the
still slighter chance that some depositors may forget their deposits.
Issuing money-certificates is a ruinous business if not connected with
issuing fiduciary media. In the early history of banking there were
banlis whose only operation consisted in issuing money-certificates.
But these banlis were indemnified by their clients for the costs incurred.
At any rate, catallactics is not iritcrested in the purely
technical problems of banks not issuing 5ducjary mcdia. The only
interest that catallactics takes in money-certificates is the connection
between issuing them and the issuing if fiduciary media.
W7hile the quantity of nloncy-certificates is catallactically unimportant,
an increase or decrease in the quantity of fiduciary media
affects the determination of money's purchasing power in the same
way as do changes in the quantity of money. Nence the question of
whether there are or are not limits to the increase in the quantity of
fiduciary media has fundamental importance.
If the clientele of the bank includes all rnembers of the market
economy, the limit to the issue of fiduciary media is the same as that
drawn to the increase in the quantity of money. A bank which is,
in an isolated country or in the whole world, the only institution
issuing fiduciary mcdia and the clientele of which comprises all individuals
and firms, is bound to comply in its conduct of affairs with
two rules:
First: It must avoid any action which could tnake the clients-i.e.,
the public-suspicious. As soon as the clients begin to lose confidence,
:hey will ask for the rcdemption of the banknotes and withdraw their
16. It is furthermore immaterial whether or not the laws assign to the rnoneysubstitutes
legal tender quality. If these things are really dealt with by people as money-substitutes and are therefore money-substitutes and equal in purchasing
power to the respective amount of money, the only effect of the legal tender
quality is to prevent malicious people from resorting to chicanery for the mere
sake of annoying their fellow men. If, however, the things concerned are not
money-substitutes and are traded at a discount below their face value, the assignment
of legal tender quality is tantamount to an authoritarian price ceiling, the
fixing of a maximum price for gold and foreign exchange and of a minimum
price for the things which are no longer money-substitutes but either credit
money or fiat money. Then the effects appear which Gresham's Law describes. 
Indirect Exchange 43 3
deposits. How far the bank can go on increasing its issues of fiduciary
media without arousing distrust, depends on psychological conditions.
Second: It must not increase the amount of fiduciary ~nedia at
such a rate and with such speed that the clients get the conviction
that the rise in prices will continue endlessly at an accelerated pace.
For if the public believes that this is the case, they will reduce their
cash holdings, flee into "real" values, and bring about the crack-up
boom. It is impossible to imagine the approach of this catastrophe
without assuming that its fifst manifestation consists in the evanescence
of confidence. The public will certainly prefer exchanging the
fiduciary media against money to fleeing into real values, i.e., to the
indiscriminate buying of various commodities. Then the bank must
go bankrupt. If the government interferes by freeing the bank from
the obligation of redeeming its banknotes and of paying back the
deposits in compliance with the terms of the contract, the fiduciary
~ncdia become either credit money or fiat money. The suspension of
specie paymenrs entirely changes the state of affairs. There is no longer
any q~~estion of fiduciary media, of money-certificates, and of moneysubstitutes.
The government enters the scene with its governmentmade
legal tender laws. The bank loses its independent existence; it
t~ccornes a tool of government policies, a subordinate office of the
treasury.
The catallactically most important problems of the issuance of
fiduciary media on the part of a singlc bank, or of banks acting in
concert, the clientele of which comprehends all individuals, are not
those of the limitations drawn to the amount of their issuance. We will
deal with them in Chapter XX, devoted to the relations between the
quantity of money and the rate of interest.
At this point of our investigations we have to scrutinize the problem
of the coexistence of a multiplicity of independent banks. Independence
means that every bank in issuing fiduciary media follows
its own coursc and does I& act in concert with oiher banks. Coexistence
means that every bank has a clientele which does not include
all members of the market system. For the sake of simplicity
we will assume that no individual or firm is a client of more than one
bank. It would not affect the result of our demonstration if we were
to assume that there are also people who are clients of more than one
bank and people who are not clients of any bank.
7-he question to be raised is not whether or not there are limits
to the issuance of fiduciary media on the part of such independently
coexisting banks. As there are even limits to the issuance of fiduciary
media on the part of a unique bank the clientele of which comprises 
434 Human Action
all people, it is obvious that there arc such limits for a multiplicity
of indcpendently coexisting banks too. What we want to show is that
for such a multiplicity of independently coexisting banks the limits
are narrower than those drawn for a single bank with an unlimited
clientele.
We assume that within a market system several independent banks
have been established in the past. While previously only money was
in use, these banks have introduced the use of money-substitutes a
part of which are fiduciary media. Each bank has a clientele and has
issucd a certain quantity of fiduciary media which arc kept as moncysubstitutes
in the cash holdings of various clients. The total quantity of
the fiduciary media as issued by the banks and absorbed by the cash
holdings of their clients has altercd the structure of prices and the
monetary unit's purchasing power. But these effects have already been
consumn~ated and at present thc ~narltet is no longer stirred bv any
movements gcncrated from this past credit expansion.
But now, we assume further, one bank alone cmbarlis upon an additional
issue of fiduciary media whiIc the other banks do not follow
suit. The clients of the cxpanding bank-whether its old clients
or new ones acquired on account of the expansion-receive additional
credits, they expand their business activities, they appear on the
market with an additional demand for goods and services, they bid
up priccs. Those people who are not clients of the expandingvbank
are not in a position to afford thcse higher priccs; they arc forced to
rcstrict their purchases. Thus there prevails on the market a shifting
of goods from the nonclients to the clients of the expanding bank. The
clients buy more from the nonclients than they sell to thcm; they havc
more to pay to the nonclients than th& receive from them. But
money-substitutes issued by the expand& bank arc not suitablc for
paymcnts to nonclients, as these people do not assign to them the
ch'aracter of moncy-substitutes. In order to settle the payments due
to nonclients, the clients must first exchange the money-substitutes
issued by their own-viz., the expanding bank-against moncy. Thc
cxpanding bank must redeem its banknotes and pay out its deposits.
Its reserve-we suppose that only a part of the money-substitutcs it
had issued had the character of fiduciary media-dwindles. The instant
approaches in which the bank will-after the exhaustion of its
tnoncy reservc-no longer be in a position to redecm the moneysubstitutes
stilI current. In ordcr to avoid insolvency it must as soon
as possible return to a policy of strengthening its moncy rescrve. It
must abandon its expansionist methods.
This reaction of the market to a credit expansion on the part of a 
Indirect Exchange 43 5
bank with a limited clientele has been brilliantly described by the
Currency School. The special case dealt with by the Currency School
referred to the coincidence of credit expansion on the part of one
country's privileged central bank or of all banks of one country and
of a nonexpansionist policy on the part of the banks of other countries.
Our demonstration covers the more general case of the coexistence of
a multiplicity of banks with different clientele as well as the most
general case of the existence of one bank with a limited clientele in a
system in which the rest of the people do not patronize any bank
and do not consider any claims as money-substitutes. It does not
matter, of course, whether one assumes that the clients of a bank live
neatly separated from those of the other banks in a definite district
or country or whether they live together with those of the other
banks. These are merely differences in the data not affecting the
catallactic problems involved.
A bank can never issue more money-substitutes than its clients
can keep in their cash holdings, The individual client can never keep
a larger portion of his total cash holding in money-substitutes than
that corresponding to the proportion of his turnover with other
clients of his bank to his total turnover. For considerations of convenience
he will, as a rule, remain far below this maximum proportion.
Thus a limit is drawn to the issue of fiduciary media. We may
admit that everybody is ready to accept in his current transactions
indiscriminately banknotes issued by any bank and checks drawn
upon any bank. But he deposits without delay with his own bank not
only the checks but also the banknotes of banks of which he is not
himself a client. In the further course his bank settles its accounts with
the bank engaged. Thus the process described above comes into
motion.
A lot of nonsense has been written about a perverse predilection
of the public for banknotes issued by dubious banks. The truth is that,
cxcept for small groups of businessmen who were able to distinguish
bemeen good and bad banks, banknotes were always looked upon
with distrust. It was the special charters which the governments
granted to privileged banks that slowly made these suspicions disappear.
The often advanced argument that small banknotes come into
the hands of poor and ignorant people who cannot distinguish between
good and bad notes cannot be taken seriously. The poorer
the recipient of a banknote is and the less familiar he is with bank
affairs, the more quickly will he spend the note and the more quickly
will it return, by wai of retail and wholesale trade, to the issuing
bank or to people conversant with banking conditions. 
436 Huma~ Action
It is very easy for a bank to increase the number of people who are
ready to accept loans granted by credit expansion and paid out in
an amount of money-substitutes. But it is very difficult for any bank
to enlarge its clientele, that is, the number of people who are ready to
consider these claims as money-substitutes and to keep them as such
in their cash-holdings. To enlarge this clientele is a troublesome and
slow process, as is the acquisition of any kind of good will. On the
other hand, a bank can lose its clientele very quickly. If it wants to
preserve it, it must never permit any doubt about its ability and
readiness to discharge all its liabilities in due compliance with the
terms of the contract. A reserve must be licpt large enough to redeem
all banknotes which a holder may submit for redemption. Therefore
no bank can content itself with issuing fiduciary media only; it
must keep a reserve against the total amount of money-substi&es
issued and thus combine issuing fiduciary media and rnoney-certificates.

It was a serious blunder to believe that the reserve's task is to provide
the means for the redemption of those banknotes the holders of
which have lost confidence in the bank. The confidence which a bank
and the money-substitutes it has issued enjoy is indivisible. It is either
present with all its clients or it vanishes entirely. If some of the clients
lose confidence, the rest of them lose it too. No bank issuing fiduciary
media and granting circulation credit can fulfill the oblig-ations which
it has taken over in issuing money-substitutes if all clients are losing
confidence and want to have their banknotes redeemed and their
deposits paid back. This is an essential feature or weakness of the
business of issuing fiduciary media and granting circulation credit.
KO system of reserve policy and no reserve requirements as enforced
by the laws can remedy it. All that a reserve can do is to make it possible
for the bank to withdraw from the market an excessive amount
of fiduciary media issued. If the bank has issued more banknotes than
its clients can use in doing business with other clients, it must redeem
such an excess.
The laws which compelled the banks to keep a reserve in a definite
ratio of the total amount of deposits and of banknotes issued were
effective in so far as they restricted the increase in the amount of
fiduciary media and of circulation credit. They were futile as far as
they aimed at safeguarding, in the event of a loss of confidence, the
prompt redemption of the banlmotes and the prompt payment of
deposits.
The Banking School failed entirely in dealing with these problems.
It was confused by a spurious idea according to which the require- 
Indirect Exchange 43 7
ments of business rigidly limit the maximum amount of convertible
banknotes that a bank can issue. They did not see that the demand
of the public for credit is a magnitude dependent on the banks'
readiness to lend, and that banks which do not bother about their own
solvency are in a position to expand circulation credit by lowering
the rate of interest below the market rate. It is not true that the maximum
amount which a bank can lend if it limits its lending to discounting
short-term bills of exchange resulting from the sale and purchase
of raw materials and half-manufactured goods, is a quantity uniquely
determined by the state of business and independent of the bank's
policies. This quantity expands or shrinks with the lowering or raising
of the rate of discount. Lowering the rate of interest is tantamount
to increasing the quantity of what is mistakenly considered as the
fair and normal requirements of business.
The Currency School gave a quite correct explanation of the recurring
crises as they upset English business conditions in the 'thirties
and 'forties of the nineteenth century. There was credit expansion on
the part of the Bank of England and the other British banks and
bankers, while there was no credit expansion, or at least not to the
same degree, in the countries with which Great Britain traded. The
external drain occurred as the necessary consequence of this state
of affairs. Everything that the IZanking School advanced in order to
refute this theory was vain. Unfortunately, the Currency School
erred in two respects. It never realized that the remedy it suggested,
namely strict legal limitation of the amount of banknotes issued beyond
the specie reserve, was not the only one. It never gave a thought
to the idea of free banking. The second fault of the Currency School
was that it failed to recognize that deposits subject to check are
money-substitutes and, as far as their amount exceeds the reserve kept,
fiduciary media, and consequentl\; no less a vehicle of credit expansion
than are banknotes. It was thk only merit of the Banking School
that it recognized that what is called deposit currency is a moneysubstitute
no less than banknotes. But except for this point, all the
doctrines of the Banking School were spurious. It was guided by
contradictory ideas concerning money's neutrality; it tried to refute
the quantity theory of money by referring to a deus ex macbinn, the
much talked about hoards, and it misconstrued entirely the problems
of the rate of interest.
It must be emphasized that the problem of legal restrictions upon
the issue of fiduciary media could emerge only because governments
had granted special privileges to one or seveial banks and had thus
prevented the free evolution of banking. If the governments had 
438 Human Action
never interfered for the benefit of speciaI banks, if they had never
released some banks from the obligation, incumbent upon all individuals
and firms in the market economy, to settle their liabilities in
full compliance with the terms of the contract, no bank problem
would have come into being. The limits which are drawn to credit
expansion would have worked effectively. Considerations of its own
solvency would have forced every bank to cautious restraint in issuing
fiduciary media. Those banks which would not have observed
these indispensable rules would have gone bankrupt, and the public,
warned through damage, would have become doubly suspicious and
reserved.
The attitudes of the European governments and their satellites with
regard to banking were from thc beginning insincere and mendacious.
The pretended solicitude for the nation's welfare, for the public in
general, and for the poor ignorant masses in particular was a mere
blind. The governments wanted inflation and credit expansion, they
wanted booms and easy money. Those Americans who twice succeeded
in doing away with a central bank were aware of the dangers
of such institutions; it was only too bad that they failed to see that
the evils they fought \\.ere present in every kind of government intcrferencc
with banking. Today even the most bigoted Ctatists cannot
deny that a11 the alleged evils of free banking count little when
compared with the disastrous effects of the tremendous inflations
which the privileged and government-controlled banks have brought
about.
It is a fable that governments interfered with banking in order to
restrict the issue of fiduciary media and to prevent credit expansion.
The idea that guided governments was, on the contrary, the lust for
inflation and credit expansion. They privileged banks because they
wanted to widen the limits drawn to credit expansion by conditions
prevailing on the unhampered market or because they were eager to
open to the treasury a source of revenue. For the most part both of
these considerations motivated the authorities. They were convinced
that the fiduciary media are an efficient means of lowering the rate
of interest, and asked the banks to expand credit for the bcnefit of
both business and the treasury. Only when the undesired effects of
credit expansion became visible, were laws enacted to restrict the
issue of banknotes-and sometimes also of deposits-not covered by
specie. The establishment of free banking was never seriously considered
precisely because it would have been too efficient in restricting
credit expansion. For rulers, writers, and the public were unanimous
in the belief that business has a fair claim to a "normal" and 
Indirect Exchange 439
'hecessary" amount of circulation credit and that this amount could
not be attained under free banking1'
Many governments never looked upon the issuance of fiduciary
media from a point of view other than that of fiscal concerns. In
their eves the foremost task of the banks was to lend money to the
treasury. The money-substitutes were pacemakers for governmentissued
paper money. The convertibIe banknote was merely a first step
on the way to the nonredeemable banknote. With the progress of
statolatry and the policy of interventionism these ideas have become
general and are no longer questioned by anybody. No government
is willing today to give any thought to the program of free banlting
lxxause no government wants to renounce what it considers a handy
scurce of revenue. What is called today financial war preparedness
is merely the ability to procure by means of privileged and government-controlled
banks all the money a warring nation may need.
Radical inflationism, although not adrnitted explicitly, is an essentia1
feature of the economic ideology of our age.
nut even at the time liberalism enjoyed its highest prestige and
governments were more eager to preserve peace and welI-being than
to foment mar, death, destruction, and misery, people were biased
in dealing with the problems of banking. Outside of the Anglo-Saxon
countries public opinion was convinced that it is one of the main
tasks of good government to lower the rate of interest and that credit
expansion is the appropriate means for the attainment of this end.
Great Britain was free from these errors when in 1844 it reformed
its bank laws. But the two shortcomings of the Currency School
vitiated this famous act. On one hand, the system of government interference
with banking was preserved. On the other hand, limits
were placed only on the issuance of banknotes not covered by specie.
The fiduciary media were suppressed only in the shape of banknotes.
They could thrive as deposit currency.
111 carrying the idea implied in the Currency Theory to its full
logical conclusion, one could suggest that all banks be forced by law
to keep against the total amount of money-substitutes (banknotes
plus demand deposits) a ioo per ccnt money reserve. This is the core
of Professor Irving Fisher's ioo per ccnt plan. But Professor Fisher
combined his plan with his proposals concerning the adoption of an
index-number standard. It has been pointed out already why such a
17. The notion of "normaIn credit expansion is absurd. Issuance of additional
fiduciary media, no matter what its quantity may be: always sets in motion those
changes in the price structure the description of which is the task of the theory of
the trade cycle. Of course, if the additional amount issued is not large, neither are
the inevitable effects of the expansion. 
440 Human Action
scheme is illusory and tantamount to open approval of the government's
power to manipulate purchasing power according to the
appetites of powerful pressure groups. But even if the IOO per cent
reserve plan were to be adopted on the basis of the unadulterated
gold standard, it would not entireIy remove the drawbacks inherent
in every kind of government interference with banking. What is
needed to prevent any further credit expansion is to place the banking
business under the general rules of commercia1 and civil laws
compelling every individual and firm to fulfill all obIigations in full
compliance with the terms of the contract. If banks are preserved as
privileged establishments subject to special legislative provisions, the
tool remains that governments can use for fiscal purposes. Then every
restriction imposed upon the issuance of fiduciary media depends
upon the government's and the padiament's good intentions. 'llley
may limit the issuance for periods which are called normal. The
restriction will be withdrawn whenever a government deems that
an emergency justifies resorting to extraordinary measures. If an
administration and the party backing it want to increase expenditure
without jeopardizing their popularity through the imposition of
higher taxes, they will always be ready to call their irnpasse an
emergency. Recourse to the printing press and to the obsequiousness
of bank managers, willing to oblige the authorities regulating thcir
conduct of affairs, is the foremost means of governments eager to
spend money for purposes for which the taxpayers are not ready to
pay higher taxes.
Free banking is the only method available for the prevention of
the dangers inherent in credit expansion. It would, it is truc, not
hinder a slow credit expansion, kept within very narrow limits, on
the part of cautious banks which provide the public with all information
required about their financial status. But under free banking it
would have been impossible for credit expansion with all its inevitable
consequences to have developed into a regular-one is tempted to say
normai-feature of rhe economic system. Only free banking wouici
have rendered the market economy secure against crises and depressions.

Looking backward upon the history of the last hundred years, one
cannot help realizing that the blunders committed by liberalism in
handling the problems of banking were a deadly blow to the market
economy. There was no reason whatever to abandon the principle
of free enterprise in the field of banking. The majority of liberal
politicians simply surrendered to the popular hostility against moneylending
and interest taking. They failed to realize'that the rate of 
Indirect Exchange 441
interest is a market phenomenon which cannot be manipulated ad
libitum by the authorities or by any other agency. They adopted the
superstiti& that lowering the rate of interest is beneficial and that
credit expansion is the right means of attaining such cheap money.
Nothing harmed the cause of liberalism more than the almost regular
rcturn of feverish booms and of the dramatic breakdown of bull markets
followed by lingering slumps. Public opinion has become convinced
that such happenings are inevitable in the unhampered market
economy. People did nor conceive that what they lamented was
the necessary outcome of policies directed toward a lowering of the
rate of interest by means of credit expansion. They stubbornly kept
to these policies and tried in vain to fight their undesired consequences
by more and more government interference.
Observdons on the Di~cwssions Concerning Free Banking
The Banking School taught that an overissuance of banknotes is impossible
if the bank limits its business to the granting of short-term loans.
When the loan is paid back at maturity, the banknotes rcturn to the bank
and thus disappear from the market. However, this happens only if the
bank restricts the amount of credits granted. (Rut even then it would not
undo the effects of its previous credit expansion. It would merely add to it
the effects of a later credit contraction.) The regular course of affairs is
that the bank rcplaces the bills expired and paid back by discounting new
bills of exchange. Then to the amount of banknotes withdrawn from the
market by the repayment of the earlier loan there corresponds an amount
of newly issued banknotes.
The concatenation which sets a limit to credit expansion under a system
of free banking works in a different way. It has no reference whatever to
the process which this so-called Principle of Fullarton has in mind. It is
brought about by the fact that credit expansion in itself does not expand a
bank's clientele, viz., the number of people who assign to the demandclaims
against this bank the character of money-substitutes. Since the overissuance
of fiduciary media on the part of one bank, as has been shown
above, increases the amounr to be paid by the expanding bank% ciients to
other people, it increases concomitantly the demand for the redemption
of its moncy-substitutes. It thus forces the expanding bank back to a restraint.18

This fact was never questioned with regard to demand deposits subject
to check. It is obvious that an expanding bank would very soon find itself
in a difficult position in clearing with the other banks. However, people
sometimes maintained that things are different as far as banknotes are concerned.

18. Vera C. Smith has not paid due attention to this primordial fact in her
meritorious book The Rationale of Central Banking (Londnn, 1936), pp. 157 ff. 
442 Hu7nan Action
In deaIing with the problems of money-substitutes, catallactics maintains
that the claims in question are dealt with by a number of people like
money, that they are, like money, given away and received in transactions
and kept in cash holdings. Everything that catallactics asserts with regard
to money-substitutes presupposes this state of affairs. But it would be preposterous
to beIieve that every banknote issued by any bank really becomes
a money-substitute. What makes a banknote a money-substitute is the
special kind of good will of the issuing bank. The slightest doubt concerning
the bank's ability or willingness to redeem every banknote without any
delay at any time and with no expense to the bearer impairs this special
good will and removes the banknotes' character as a money-substitute. We
may assume that everybody not only is prepared to get such questionable
banknotes as a loan but also prefers to receive them as payment instead of
waiting longer. But if any doubts exist concerning their prime character,
people will hurry to get rid of them as soon as possible. They will keep in
their cash holdings money and such money-substitutes as they consider
perfectly safe and will dispose of the suspect banknotes. These banknotes
will be traded at a discount, and this fact wilI carry thcm back to the issuing
bank which alone is bound to redeem thcm at their full face value.
The issue can still better be clarified by reviewing banking conditions in
continental Europe. Here the commercial banks were free from any limitation
concerning the amount of deposits subject to check. They would have
been in a position to grant circulation credit and thus expand credit by
adopting the methods applied by the banks of the Anglo-Saxon countries.
However, the public was not ready to treat such bank deposits as moneysubstitutes.
As a rule a man who received a check cashed it immediately
and thereby withdrew the amount from the bank. It was impossible for a
commercial bank to lend, except for negligibIe sums, by crediting the
debtor's account. As soon as the debtor wrote out a check, a withdrawal of
the amount concerned from the bank resulted. OnIy a small group of big
business treated deposits with the country's Central Bank of Issue (not
those with the commercial banks) as money-substitutes. Although the
Central Banks in most of these countries were not submitted to any legal
restrictions with regard to their deposit business, they were prevented from
using it as a vehicle of large-scale credit expansion because the clientele for
deposit currency was too small. Banknotes were practicalIy the sole instrument
of circulation credit and credit expansion. Similar conditions
prevailed and for the most part still prevail by and large in all countries
of the world which are outside the pale of Anglo-Saxon banking methods.

In the 'eighties of the nineteenth century the Austrian Government embarked
upon a project of popularizing checkbook money by establishing a
checking account department with the Post Office Savings Service. It succeeded
to some degree. Balances with this department of the Post Office
were treated as money-substitutes by a clientele which was broader than
that of the checking account department of the country's Central Bank of 
Indirect Exchange 443
Issue. The system was later preserved by the new states which in 191 8 succeeded
the Habsburg Empire. It has also been adopted by many other
European nations, for instance Germany. It is important to realize that this
kind of deposit currency was a purely governmental venture and that the
circulation credit that the system granted was exclusively lent to the
governments. It is characteristic that the name of the Austrian Post Office
Savings Institution, and likewise of most its foreign replicas, was not Savings
Bank, but Savings Ofice (Amt). Apart from these demand deposits
with the government post system in most of the non-Anglo-Saxon comtries,
banknotes-and, to a small extent, also deposits with the Governmentcontrolled
Central Bank of Issue-are the only vehicles of circulation
credit. In speaking of credit expansion with regard to these countries, one
refers almost entirely to banknotes.
In the United States many employers pay salaries and even wages by
writing out checks. As far as the payees immediately cash the checks received
and withdraw the whole amount from the bank, the method means
merely that the onerous burden of manipdating coins and banknotes is
shifted from the employer's cashier to the bank's cashier. It has no catallactic
implications. If all citizens were to deal in this way with checks receivcd,
the deposits would not be money-substitutes and could not be used as instruments
of circulation credit. It is solely the fact that a considerable part
of the public looks upon deposits as money-substitutes that makes them
what is popularly called checkbook money or dcposit currency.
It is a mistake to associate with the notion of free banking the image of a
state of affairs under which everybody is free to issue banknotes and to
cheat the public ad libitum. People often refer to the dictum of an anonymous
American quoted by Tooke: "Free trade in banking is free trade in
swindling." However, freedom in the issuance of banknotes would have
narrowed down the use of banknotes considerably if it had not entirely
suppressed it. It was this idea which Cernuschi advanced in thc hearings of
the French Banking Inquiry on October 24, 1865: "I believe that what is
called freedom of banking would result in a total suppression of banknotes
in France. I want to give everybody the right to issue banknotes so that
nobody should take any banknotes any longer."
People may uphold the opinion that banknotes are more handy than
coins and that considerations of convenience recommend their use. As far
as this is the case, the public would be prepared to pay a premium for the
avoidance of the inconveniences involved in carrying a heavy weight of
coins in their pockets. Thus in earlier days banknotes issued by banks of
unquestionable solvency stood at a slight premium as against rnetallic currency.
Thus travelers' checks are rather popular although the bank issuing
them charges a commission for their issuance. But all this has no reference
whatever to the problem in question. It does not provide a justification
for the policies urging the public to resort to the use of banknotes. Govern-
19. Cf. Cernuschi, Contre le billet de banque (Paris, 1866), p. 55. 
444 Human Action
ments did not foster the use of banltnotes in order to avoid inconvenience
to ladies shopping. Their idea was to lower the rate of interest and to open
a source of cheap credit to their treasuries. In their eyes the increase in the
quantity of fiduciary media was a means of promoting welfare.
Banknotes are not indispensable. All the economic achievements of
capitalism would have been accomplished if they had never existed. Besides,
deposit currency can do all the things banknotes do. And government interference
with the deposits of commercial banks cannot be justified by the
hypocritical pretext that poor ignorant wage earners and farmers must be
protected against wicked bankers.
But, some people may ask, what about a cartel of the commercial banks?
Could not the banks collude for the sake of a boundless expansion of their
issuance of fiduciary media? The objection is preposterous. As long as the
public is not, by government interference, deprived of the right of withdrawing
its deposits, no bank can risk its own good will by collusion with
banks whose good will is not so high as its own. One must not forget that
every bank issuing fiduciary media is in a rather precarious position. Its
most valuable asset is its reputation. It must go bankrupt as soon as doubts
arise concerning its perfect trustworthiness and solvency. It would be
suicidal for a bank of good standing to link its name with that of other
banks with a poorer good will. Under free banking a cartel of the banks
would destroy the country's wholc banking system. It would not servc the
interests of any bank.
For the most part the banks of good repute are blamed for their conservatism
and their reluctance to expand credit. In the eyes of people not
deserving of credit such restraint appears as a vice. But it is the first and
supreme rule for the conduct of banking operations under frce banking.
It is extremely difficult for our contemporaries to conceive of the conditions
of free banking because they take government interference with
banking for granted and as necessary. However, one must remember that
this government interference was based on the erroneous assumption that
credit expansion is a proper means of lowering the rate of interest permanently
and without harm to anybody but the callous capitalists. The
governments interfered precisely because they knew that frce banking
keeps credit expansion within narrow limits.
Economists may be ~ight in asserting that the present state of banking
makes government interference with banking problems advisable. But this
present state of banking is not the outcome of the operation of the unhampered
market economy. It is a product of the various governments' attempts
to bring about the conditions required for large-scale credit expansion.
If the governments had nevcr interfered, the use of banknotes and
of deposit currency would be limited to those strata of the population u 110
know very well how to distinguish between solvent and insolvent banks.
KO large-scale credit expansion wouId have been possible. The governments
alone are responsible for the spread of the superstitious awe with
which the common man looks upon every bit of paper upon which the 
Indirect Exchange 445
treasury or agencies which it controls have printed the magical words
legal tender.
Government interfercnce with the present state of banking affairs could
be justified if its aim were to liquidate the unsatisfactory conditions by preventing
or at least seriously restricting any further credit expansion. In
fact, the chief objective of present-day government interference is to intensify
further credit expansion. This policy is doomed to faiIure. Sooner
or later it must result in a catastrophe.
I 3. The Size and Composition of Cash Holdings
The total amount of money and money-substitutes is kept by individuals
and firms in their cash holdings. The share of each is determined
by marginal utility. Each is eager to keep a certain portion
of his total wealth in cash. He gets rid of an excess of cash by increased
purchases and remedies a deficiency of cash by increased
sales. The popular terminology confusing the demand for money for
cash holding and the demand for wealth and vendible goods must not
delude an economist.
What is valid with regard to individuals and firms is no less true
with regard to cvery sum of the cash holdings of a number of individuals
and firms. he point of view from which we treat a number
of such individuals and firms as a totality and sum up their cash
holdings is immaterial. The cash holdings oi a city, a province, or a
country is the sum of the cash holdings of all its residents.
Let us assume that the market economy uses only one kind of money
and that money-substitutes are either unknown or used in the whole
arca by everybody without any difference. Thcre are, for example,
gold money and redeemable banknotes, issued by a world bank and
treated by everybody as money-substitutes. On these assumptions
measures hindering the exchange of commodities and services do not
affect the state of monetary affairs and the size of cash holdings.
Tarifis, embargoes, and migration barriers affect the tendencies toward
an equalization of prices, wages, and interest rates. They do not
react directly upon cash holdings.
If a government aims at increasing the amount of cash kept by its
subjects, it must order them to deposit a certain amount with an office
and to leave it there untouched. The necessity of procuring this
amount would force everybody to sell more and ;o buy less; domestic
prices would drop; cxports would be increased and imports reduced;
a quantity of cash would be imported. But if the government were
simply to obstruct the importation of goods and the exportation of 
446 Human Action
money, it would fail to attain its goal. If imports drop, other things
being equal, exports drop concomitantly.
The role money plays in international trade is not diffcrcnt from
that which it plays in domestic trade. Money is no less a medium of
exchange in foreign trade than it is in domestic trade. Both in domcstic
trade and in international trade purchases and sales result in a more
than passing change in the cash holdings of individuals and firms only
if people are purposely intent upon increasing or restricting the size
of their cash holdings. A surplus of moncy flows into a country only
when its rcsidents are more eager to increase their cash holdings than
are the foreigners. An outflow of money occurs only if the residents
arc more eager to reduce their cash holdings than are the foreigners.
A transfer of money from one country into another country which
is not compensated by a transfcr in the opposite direction is never the
unintended result of international trade transactions. It is always the
outcome of intended changes in the cash holdings of the residents.
Just as wheat is cxported only if a country's residents want to export
a surplus of wheat, so money is exportcd only if the rcsidcnts want to
export a sum of money which they consider as a surplus.
If a country turns to the employment of money-substitutes which
are not employed abroad, such a surpIus emerges. The appearance of
these money-substitutes is tantamount to an increase in the country's
supply of money in the broader sense, i.c., supply of money plus
fiduciary media; it brings about a surplus in the supply of moncy in
the broadcr sense. The residents are eager to get rid of their share
in the surplus by increasing their purchases either of domestic or of
foreign goods. In the first case cxports drop and in the second case
imports increase. In both cases the surplus of money goes abroad. As,
according to our assumption, money-substitutes cannot be exportcd,
only money proper flows out. The result is that within the domestic
supply of money in the broader sense (money + fiduciary media)
the portion of money drops and the portion of fiduciary media increases.
The domestic stock of money in the narrower sense is now
smaller than it was previously.
Now, we assume further, the domestic money-substitutes cease
to be money-substitutes. The bank which issued them no longer
redeems them in money. These former ~noney-substitutes are now
claims against a bank which does not fulfill its obligations, a bank
whose ability and wilIingncss to pay its debts is questionable. Nobody
knows whcther and when they will ever be redeemed. But it
may be that these claims are used by the public as credit money. As
money-substitutes they had been considered as equivalents of the 
lndirect Exchange 447
sum of money to which they gave a claim payable at any moment.
As credit money they are now traded at a discount.
At this point the government may interfere. It decrees that these
pieces of credit money are legal tender at their face value.'O Every
creditor is bound to accept them in payment at their face value. No
trader is free to discriminate acrainst them. The decree tries to force P the public to treat things of different exchange value as if they had
the same exchange value. It interferes with the structure of prices
as determined by the market. It fixes ~ninimum prices for the credit
money and maximum prices for the commodity money (gold) and
fore& exchange. The result is not what the government aimed at.
The difference in exchange value between credit money and gold
does not disappear. As it is forbidden to employ the coins according
to their market price, people no longer employ them in buying and
selling and in paying debts. They keep them or they export them.
The conmodity money disappears from the domestic market. Bad
money, says res sham's Law, drives good money out of the country.
It would be more correct to say that the money which the
government's decree has undervalued disappears from the market
and the money which the decree has overvalued remains.
The outflow of commodity money is thus not the effect of an unfavorable
balance of payments, but the effect of a government interference
with the price structure.
14. Balances of Payments
The confrontation of the money equivalent of all incomings and
outgoings of an individual or a group of individuals during any particular
period of time is called the balance of payments. The credit
side and the debit side art always equal. The balance is always in
balance.
If we want to know an ,ndividual's position in the frame of the
tnarltet economy, we must look at his balance of payments. It tells us
everything about the role he plays in the system of the social division
of labor. It shows what he gives to his fellow men and what he receives
or takes from them. It shows whether he is a self-supporting decent
citizen or a thief or an almsman. It shows whether he consumes a11 his
proceeds or whether he saves a part of them. There are many human
20. Very often the legal tender quality had bccn granted to these banknotes
at a time when they still were money-wbstitutes and as such equal to money in
their exchange value. At that time the decree had no catallactic importance. Now
it becomes important because the market no longer considers them moneysubstitutes.

448 Human Action
things which are not reflected in the sheets of the ledger; there are
virtues and achievements, vices and crimes that do not Ieave any
traces in the accoints. But as far as a man is integrated into socia1 life
and activities, as far as he contributes to the joint effort of society and
his contributions are appreciated by his fellow men, and as far as
he consumes what is or could be sold and bought on the market, the
information conveyed is complete.
If we combine the balances of payments of a definite number of
individuals and Ieave out of account the items referring to transactions
between the members of this group, we draw up the group's
balance of payment. This balance tells us how the members of the
group, considered as an integrated complex of people, are connected
with the rest of the market society. Thus we can draw up the balance
of payments of the members of the New York Bar, of the Belgian
farmers, of the residents of Paris, or of those of the Swiss Canton of
Bern. Statisticians are mostly interested in establishing the balance of
payments of the residents of the various countries which are organized
as independent nations.
While an individual's balance of payments convcys exhaustive information
about his social position, a group's balance discloses much
less. It says nothing about the mutual relations between the members
of the group. The greater the group is and the less homogeneous its
members are, the more defective is the information vouchsafed by
the balance of payments. The balance of payments of 1,atvia tells
more about the conditions of the Latvians than the United States
balance of payments about the conditions of the Americans. If one
wants to describe a country's social and economic condition, one
does not need to deal with every single inhabitant's personal balance
of payments. But one must not form other groups than such as are
composed of members who arc by and large homogeneous in their
social standing and their economic activities.
Reading balances of payments is thus very instructive. Howcver,
one must know how to interpret them, to guard against popular
f allacies.
It is customary to list separately the monetary and the nonmonetary
items of a country's balance of payments. One calls thc balance
favorable if there is a surplus of the imports of money and bullion
over the exports of money and bullion. One calls the balance unfavorable
if the exports of money and bullion exceed the imports.
This terminology stems from inveterate Mercantilist errors unfortunately
still surviving in spite of the devastating criticisms of the
economists. The imports and exports of money and buIlion are viewed 
Indirect Exchange 449
as the unintentional outcome of the configuration of the nonmonetary
items of the balance of payments. This opinion is utterly fallacious.
An excess in the exports of money and bullion is not the
product of an unhappy concatenation of circumstances that befalls
a nation like an act of God. It is the result of the fact that the residents
of the country concerned are intent upon reducing the amount of
money held and upon buying goods instead. This is why the balance
of payments of the gold-producing countries is as a rule "unfavorable";
this is why the balance of payments of a country substituting
fiduciary media for a part of its money stock is "unfavorable" as
long as this process goes on.
No provident action on the part of a paternal authority is required
lest a country lose its whole money stock by an unfavorable balance
of payments. Things are in this regard not different between the
personal balances of payments of individuals and those of groups.
Neither are they different between the balances of payments of a
city or a district and those of a sovereign nation. No govcrnmcnt
interfcrence is needed to prevent the residents of New York from
spending all their money in dealings with the other forty-seven states
of the Union. As long as any American attaches any weight to the
keeping of cash, he will spontaneously take charge of the matter.
Thus he will contribute his share to the maintenance of an adequate
supply of money in his country. Bnt if no American were interested
in keeping, any cash holding, no Sovernment measure concerning
foreign trade and the settlement of jntcrnational payments could
prevent an outflow of America's total monetary stock. A rigidly enforced
embargo upon the exportation of money and bullion would
be required.
15. Interlocal Exchange Rates
Let us first assume that there is only one kind of money. Then
with regard to money's purchasing power at various places the same
is valid as with regard to commodity prices. The final price of cotton
in IAiverpool cannot exceed thc final price in Houston, Texas, by
more than thc cost of transportation. As soon as the price in Liverpool
rises to a higher point, merchants will ship cotton to Liverpool
and thus will bring about a tendency toward a return to the final
price. The price of an order for the payment of a definite amount of
guilders in Amsterdam cannot rise in New York above the amount
determined by the costs involved by reminting the coins, shipment,
insurance, and the interest during {he period required for all these
manipulations. As soon as the difference rises above this point-the 
450 Human Action
gold export point-it becomes profitable to ship gold from New York
to Amsterdam. Such shipments force the guilder exchange rate in
New York down below the gold export point. A difference between
the configuration of interlocal exchange rates for commodities and
those for money is brought about by the fact that as a rule commodities
move only in one direction, namcly, from the places of surplus
production to those of surplus consumption. Cotton is shipped from
Houston to Liverpool and not from Liverpool to Houston. Its price is
lower in Houston than in Liverpool by the amount of shipping costs.
But money is shipped now this way, now that.
The error of those who try to interpret the fluctuations of the
interlocal exchange rates and the interlocal shipments of money as
determined by the configuration of the nonmonetary items of the
balance of payments is that they assign to money an exceptional position.
They do not see that with regard to interIoca1 exchange rates
there is no difference between money and commodities. If cotton
trade between Houston arid Liverpool is possible at all, the cotton
prices at these two places cannot differ by more than the total amount
of costs required for shipment. In the same way in which there is a
flow of cotton from the southern states of the United States to
Europe, gold flows from the gold-producing countries like South
Africa to Europe.
L:t us disregard the case of the gold-producing countries and let
us assun e that the individuals and firms trading with one another on
the basis of the gold standard do not have the intention of changing
the size of their cash holdings, From their purchases and sales, claims
are generat:d which necessitate interlocal payments. But according
to our assumption these interlocal payments are equal in amount. The
amount that thc residents of A have to pay to the rcsidents of B is
equal to the amount that the residents of B have to pay to the residents
of A. It is therefore possible to save the costs of shipping gold from
A to B and from B to A. Claims and debts can be settled by a sort of
interlocal clearing. It is merely a technical problem whether this
evening up is affected by an interlocal clearinghouse organization or
by the turnovers of a special market for foreign exchange. At any rate,
the price which a resident of A (or of B) has to pay for a payment
due in B (or in A) is kept within the margins determined by the
shipment costs. It cannot rise above the par value by more than the
shipment costs (gold export point) and cannot fall below the shipment
costs (gold import point).
It may happen that-all our other assun~ptions remaining unaltered
-there is a temporal discrepancy between the payments due from 
hdirect Exchange 451
A to U and those from B to A. Then an interlocal shipment of gold
can only be avoided by the interposition of a credit transaction, If
the importer who today has to pay from A to B can buy at the marltet
of foreign exchange only such claims against residents of B as fall
dlle in ninety days, he can save the costs of shipping gold by borrowing
the sum concerned in B for a period of ninety days. The dealers
in foreign exchange will resort to this makeshift if the costs of borrowing
in B do not exceed the costs of borrowing in A by more than
double the costs of shipping gold. If the cost of shipping gold is 1/8 per
cent, they will be ready to pay for a three months' loan in B up to
I per cent (pro anno) more as interest than corresponds to the state
of the money-market intercst rate at which, in the absence of such
requirements for interlocal payments, credit transactions between
A and B would be effected.
It is permissible to express these facts by contending that the daily
state of the baIance of payments t)etween A and B determines the
point at which, within the margins drawn by the goId export point
and the gold import point, the foreign exchange rates are fixed. But
one must not forget to add that this happens only if the residents of
A and of B do not intend to change the size of their cash holdings.
Only because this is the case does it become possibIe to avoid the
transfer of gold altogether and to keep foreign exchange rates within
the limits drawn by the two gold points. If the residents of A want
to reduce their cash holdings and those of R want to increase theirs,
gold must be shipped from A to B and the rate for cable transfer B
reaches in A the gold export poinr. Then gold is sent from A to B
in the same way in which cotton is regularly sent from the United
States to Europe. The rate of cable transfer B reaches the gold export
point because the residents of A are selling gold to those of B, not because
their balance of payments is unfavorable.
All this is valid with regard to any payments to be transacted between
various places. It makes no difference whether the cities concerned
belong to the same sovereign nation or to different sovereigl~
nations. However, government interference has considerably changed
the conditions. All governments have created institutions which make
it possible for the residents of their countries to make interlocal
domestic payments at par. The costs involved in shipment of currency
from one place to another are borne either by the treasury or
by ;he country's central bank system or by another government
~hnk such as the postal savings banks of various European countries.
Thus there is no longer any market for domestic interlocal exchange.
The public is not charged more for an interlocal order to pay than 
45 2 Human Action
for a local one or, if the charge is slightly different, it no longer has
any reference to the fluctuations of the interlocal movements of
currency within the country. It is this government interference which
has sharpened the difference between domestic payment and payment
abroad. Domestic payments are transacted at par, while with
regard to foreign payments fluctuations occur within the limits
drawn by the gold points.
If more than one kind of money is uscd as medium of exchange,
the mutual exchange ratio between thcm is determined by their
purchasing power. The final prices of the various commodities, as
expressed in each of the two or several kinds of money, are in proportion
to each other. The final exchange ratio between the various
kinds of money reflects their purchasing power with regard to the
commodities. ff any discrepancy appears, opportunity for profitable
transactions presents itself and the endeavors of businessmen eager
to take advantage of this opportunity tend to make it disappear again.
The purchasing-power parity theory of foreign exchange is merely
the application of the gcneral theorems conccrning the determination
of prices to the special case of the coexistence of various kinds of
money.
It does not matter whcthcr the various kinds of money coexist
in the same territory or whether their use is limited to distinct areas.
In any case the mutual exchange ratio between them tends to a final
state at which it no longcr makes any difference whcthcr one buys
and sells against this or that kind of money. As far as costs of intcrlocal
transfer come into play, these costs must be added or deducted.
The changes in purchasi~g power do not occur at the same time
with regard to all commodities and services. Let us consider again
the practically very important instance of an inflation in one country
only. ~hc increase in the quantity of domestic credit money or
fiat money affects at first only the prices of somc commodities and
services. The prices of the othcr commodities remain for some time
stiji ac their previous stand. Tne exchange rario between the domestic
currency and the foreign currencies is determined on the bourse, a
market organized and managed according to the pattern and the
commercial customs of the stock exchange. The dealers on this special
market are quicker than the rest of thc people in anticipating future
changes. Consequently the price structure of the market for foreign
exchange reflects the new7 money relation sooner than the prices of
many commodities and services. As soon as the domestic inflation begins
to affect the prices of some con~rnodities, at any rate long before
it has exhausted all its effects upon the greater part of the prices of 
Indirect Exchange 45 3
commodities and services, the price of foreign exchange tends to rise
to rhe point corresponding to the final state of domestic prices and
wage rates.
This fact has been entirely misinterpreted. People failed to realize
that the rise in foreign exchange rates merely anticipates the movement
of domestic commodity prices. They explained the boom in
forcign exchange as an outcome of an unfavorable balance of payments.
The demand for foreign exchange, they maintained, has been
increased by a deterioration of the balance of trade or of other items
of the balance of payments, or simply by sinister machinations on the
part of unpatriotic speculators. The higher prices to be paid for
foreign exchange cause the domestic prices of imported goods to
rise. The prices of the domestic products must follow suit because
otherwisc their low state would encourage business to withhold them
from domcstic consun~ption and to sell them abroad at a premium.
The fallacies involved in this popular doctrine can casily be shown.
If the nominal income of the domestic public had not been increased
by the inffation, thcy would be forced to restrict their consumption
cither of imported or of domestic products. In the first case imports
would drop and in the second case exports would increase. Thus the
balance of trade would again be brought back to what the Mercantilists
call a favorable state.
Pressed hard, the LMercantilists cannot help admitting the correctness
of this reasoning. But, they say, it applies only to normal trade
conditions. It does not take into account the state of affairs in countries
which arc under the necessity of importing vital commodities
such as food and essential raw materials. The importation of such
goods cannot be curtailed below a certain minimum. They are imported
no matter what prices must he paid for them. If the foreign
exchange required for importing them cannot be procured by an
adequate amount of exports, the balance of trade becomes unfavorable
and the foreign exchange ratcs must rise more and more.
This is no less illusory than all other Mercantilist ideas. However
urgcnt and vital an individual's or a group of individuals' demand
for some goods may be, they can satisfy it on the market only by
paying the market price. If an Austrian wants to buy Canadian
wheat, he must pay the market price in Canadian dollars. He must
procure these Canadian dollars by exporting goods either directly
to Canada or to some other country. He does not increase the amount
of Canadian dollars available by paying higher prices (in schillings,
the Austrian domestic currency) for Canadian dollars. Moreover,
he cannot afford to pay such higher prices (in schillings) for imported 
454 Human Action
wheat if his income (in schillings) remains unchanged. Only if the
Austrian Govcrnrnent embarks upon an inflationary policy and thus
increases the number of schillings in the pockets of its citizens, are
the Austrians in a position to continue to buy the quantities of
Canadian wheat they used to buy without curtailing other expenditures.
If there were no domestic inflation, any rise in the price of imported
goods would result either in a drop in their consumption or in
a restriction in the consumption of other goods. Thus the process
of readjustment as described above would have come into motion.
If a man lacks the money to buy bread from his neighbor, the village
baker, the cause is not to be seen in an alleged scarcity of money.
The cause is that this man did not succeed in earning the amount of
money needed either by selling goods or by rendering services for
which people are prepared to pay. The samc is true with regard to
international trade. A country may be distressed on account of the
fact that it is at a loss to sell abroad as tnany commodities as it would
have to sell in order to buy all the food its citizens want. But this
does not mean that foreign exchange is scarce. It means that the
residents are poor. And domestic inflation is certainly not an appropriate
means to remove this poverty.
Keither has speculation any reference to the determination of
foreign exchange rates. The speculators merely anticipate the expected
alterations. If they err, if their opinion that an inflation is in
progress is wrong, the structure of prices and foreign exchange rates
will not correspond to their anticipations and they will have to pay
for their mistakes by losses.
The doctrine according to which foreign exchange rates are determined
by the balance of payments is based upon an illicit generalization
of a special case. If two places, A and B, use the same kind of
money and if the residents do not want to make any changes in the
size of their cash holdings, over a given period of time the amount of
money paid from the residents of A to those of B equals the amount
paid frotn the residents of B to those of A and all payments can be
settled without shipping money from A to B or from R to A. Then
the rate of cabIe transfer B in A cannot rise above a point slightly
below the gold export point and cannot drop below a point slightly
above the gold import point, and vice versa. W7ithin this margin the
daiIy state of the balance of payments determines thc daily state of the
foreign exchange rate. This is the case only becausc neither the
residents of A nor those of B want to alter the amount of their cash
holdings. If the residents of A want to decrease their cash holdings
and those of B to increase theirs, money is shipped from A to B and 
lndirect Exchange 45 5
the cable rate B reaches in A the gold export point. But money is not
shipped because A's balance of payments has become unfavorable.
TVhat is called by the Mercantilists an unfavorable balance of payments
is the effect of a deliberate restriction of cash holdings on the
part of the citizens of A and a deliberate increase in cash holdings on
the part of the citizens of B. If no resident of A were ready to rcduce
his cash holding, such an outflow of money from A could never
materialize.
?he difference between the tradc in money and that in the vendible
commodities is this: As a rule commodities move on a one-way road,
viz., from the places of surpIus production to those of surplus consumption.
Consequently the price of a certain commodity in the
places of surplus ~roduction is as a ruIe lower by the amount of shipping
costs than in the places of surplus consumption. Things are different
with money if we do not takc into account the conditions of
the gold-mining countries and of those countries whose residents
dcliberately aim at altering the size of their cash holdings. Money
moves now this way, now that. At one time a country exports money,
at another time it imports moncy. Every cxporting country very
soon becomes an importing country precisely on account of its
previous exports. For this reason alone it is possibIe to save the costs
of shipping money by the interplay of the market for foreign exchange.

16. Interest Ratcs and the Money Relation
A4oney plays in credit transactions the same role it plays in all other
business transactions. As a rule loans are granted in money, and interest
and principal are paid in money. The payments resulting from
such dealings influence the size of cash holding onIy temporarily. The
recipients of loans, interest, and principal spend the sums received
either for consumption or for investment. They increase their cash
holdings only if definite considerations, independent of the inflow of
the money received, motivate them to act in this way.
The final state of the market rate of interest is the same for all
loans of the same character. Differences in the rate of interest are
caused either by differences in the soundness and trustworthiness of
the debtor or by differences in the terms of the contract.21 Differences
in interest rates which are not brought about by these differences in
conditions tend to disappear. The applicants ?or credits approach
the lenders who ask a lower rate of interest. The lenders are eager
2 I. For a more elaborate analysis, see below, pp. 536-545. 
456 Human Action
to cater to people who are ready to pay higher interest rates. Things
on the money market are the same as on all other markets.
With regaid to interlocal credit transactions the interlocal exchange
rates are to be taken into account as well as differences in the monetary
standard if there are any. Ixt us contemplate the case of two
countries, A and 8. A is under the gold standard, B under the silver
standard. The lender who considers lending money from A to B must
first sell gold against silver and later, at the termination of the loan,
silver against gold. If at that later date the price of silver has dropped
as against gold, the principal repaid by the debtor (in silver) will
buy a smaller amount of gold than that expended by the creditor
when he previously embarked upon the transaction. He will therefore
only venture lending in B if the difference in the market rate
of interest between A and B is large enough to cover an expected fall
in the price of silver as against gold. The tendency toward an equalization
of the market rate of interest for short-term loans which prevails
if A and R are both under the same monetary standard is seriously impaired
under a diversity of standards.
If A and B are both under the same standard, it is impossible for
the banks of A to expand credit if those of B do not espouse the same
policy. Credit expansion in A malses prices rise, and short-term interest
rates drop in A, while prices and interest rates in B remain unchanged.
Consequently exports from A drop and imports to A increase.
In addition, the money lenders of A become eager to lend on
the short-term loan market of B. The result is an external drain from
A which makes the money reserves of A's banks dwindIe. If the
banks of A do not abandon their expansionist policy, they will become
insolvent.
This process has been entirely misinterpreted. People speak of an
important and vital function which a country's central bank has to
fulfill on behalf of the nation. It is, they say, the central bank's sacred
duty to preserve the stability of foreign exchange rates and to protect
the natibn's gold reserve .against attacks on the part of foreign
speculators and their domestic abettors. The truth is that all that a
central bank does lest its gold reserve evaporate is done for the sake
of the preservation of its own solvency. It has jeopardized its financial
position by embarking upon credit kxpansion and must now undo
its previous action in order to avoid its disastrous consequences. Its
expansionist policy has encountered the obstacIes limiting the issuance
of fiduciary media.
The use of the terminology of warfare is inappropriate in dealing
with monetary matters, as it is in the treatment of all other catallactic 
Indirect Exchange 457
problems. There is no such thing as a "war" between the central banks.
No sinister forces arc "attacking" a bank's position and threatening
the stability of foreign exchange rates. No "defender" is needed to
'Lpr~tc~t" a nation's currency system. It is, moreover, not true that
what prevents a nation's central bank or its private banks from lowering
the domestic market rate of interest is considerations of the
preservation of the gold standard and of forcign exchange stability
and of frustrating the machinations of an international combine of
capitalistic moneylenders. The market rate of interest cannot be
lowered by a credit expansion except for a short time, and even then
it brings about all those effects which the theory of the trade cyck
describes.
When the Bank of England redeemed a badmote issued according
to the terms of the contract, it did not render unselfishly a vital service
to the British people. It simply did what every housewife does in
paying the grocer's bill. The idea that there is some special merit in
a central bank's fulfillment of its voluntarily assumed responsibilities
could originate only because again and again governments granted
to these banks the privilege of denying to their clicnts the payments
to which they had a legal title. In fact, the central banks became more
and more subordinate offices of the treasuries, mere tools for the
performance of credit expansion and inflation. It does not make any
difference practically whether they are or are not owned by the government
and directly managed by government officials. In effect
the banks granting circulation credit are in every country today only
affiliates of the treasuries.
There is but one means of keeping a local and national currencJr
permanently at par with gold and foreign exchange: unconditional
redemption. The central bank has to buy at the parity rate any amount
of gold and forcign exchange offered against domestic banknotes
and deposit currency; on the other hand it has to sell, without discrimination,
any amount of gold and foreign exchange asked for
by people ready to pay the parity price in domestic banknotes, coins,
or deposit currency. Such was the policy of central banks under the
gold standard. Such was also the policy of those governments and
central banks which had adopted the currency system commonly
known under the name of the gold exchange standard. The onli
difference between the "orthodox" or classical gold standard as it
existed in Great Britain from the early 'twenties of the nineteenth
century until the outbreak of the first WorId War and in other
countries on the one hand, and the gold exchange standard on the
other, concerned the use of gold coins on the domestic market. Under 
458 Human Action
the classical gold standard a part of the cash holdings of the citizens
consisted in gold coins and the rest in money substitutes. Under
the gold exchange standard the cash holdings consisted entirely in
money-substitutes.
Pegging a certain rate of foreign exchange is tantamount to redemption
at this rate.
A foreign exchange equalization account, too, can succeed in its
operations only as far as it clings to the same methods.
The reasons why European governments in the last few years have
preferred foreign cxchange equalization accounts to the operation
of central banks are obvious. Central bank legislation was an achievement
of liberal governments or of governments which did not dare
to challenge openly, at least in the conduct of financial policies, public
opinion of the liberal countries. The operations of central banks were
therefore adjusted to economic freedom. For that reason they were
considered unsatisfactory in this age of rising totaIitarianism. The
main characteristics of the operation of a foreign exchange equalization
account as distinguished from central bank policy are:
I. The authorities keep the transactions of the account secret. The
laws have obliged the central banks to publicize their actual status at
short intervals, as a rule every week. But the status of the foreign exchange
equalization accounts is known only to the initiated. Officialdom
renders a report to the public only after a lapse of time when
the figures are of interest to historians alone and of no use whatever
to the businessman.
z. This secrecy makes it possible to discriminate against people
not in great favor with the authorities. In many continental countries
of Europe it resulted in scandalous corruption. Other governments
used the power to discriminate to the detriment of businessmen belonging
to linguistic or religious minorities or supporting opposition
parties.
3. A parity is no longer fixed by a law duly promulgated by parliamenr:
and therefore known to every citizen. The determination depends
upon the arbitrariness of bureaucrats. From time to time the
newspapers reported: The Ruritanian currency is weak. A more
correct description would have been: The Ruritanian authorities have
decided to raise the price of foreign ~xchange.?~
A foreign exchange equalization account is not a magic wand for
remedying the evils of inflation. It cannot apply any means other
than those available to "orthodox" central banks. A& it must, like
22. Sec below, pp. 780-783. 
Indirect Exchange 459
the central banks, fail in the endeavors to keep foreign exchange rates
at par if there is domestic inflation and credit expansion.
It has been asserted that the "orthodox" rnethods of fighting an
external drain by raising thc rate of discount no longer work because
nations are no longer prepared to comply with "the rules of the
game." Now, the gold standard is not a game, but a social institution.
Its working does not dcpend on the preparedness of any people to
observe some arbitrary rules. It is controlled by the operation of inexorablc
economic law.
The critics give point to their objection by citing the fact that
in the interwar period a rise in the rate of discount failed to stop the
external drain, i.e., the outflow of specie and the transfer of deposits
into foreign countries. But this phcnomenon was caused by the
governments' anti-gold and pro-inflation policies. If a man expects
that he will lose 40 per cent of his balance by an impending devaluation,
he will try to transfer his deposit into another country and will
not change his mind if the bank rate in the country planning a dcvaluation
rises I or z per cent. Such a rise in the rate of drscount is
obviously not a compensation for a loss ten or twenty or even forty
tilnes greater. Of course, the gold standard cannot work if governments
are eager to sabotage its operations.
I 7. Secondary Media of Exchange
The use of money does not remove the differences which exist
between the various nonmonetary goods with regard to their marketability.
Tn the money economy there is a very substantial difference
between the marketability of money and that of the vendible goods.
But there remain differences between the various specimens of this
latter group. For some of them it is easier to find without &lay a
buyer ready to pay the highest pricc which, under the state of the
market, can possibly be attained. With others it is morc difficult,
,4 first-class bond is more marketable than a house in 3 city's main
streer, and an old fur coat is more marketable than an autograph of
an eighteenth-century statesman. One no longer compares the marketability
of the various vendible goods with the perfect marketability
of money. One merely compares the degree of marketability
of the various commodities. One may speak of the secondary
marketability of the vendible goods.
He who owns a stock of goods of a high degree of secondary marketability
is in a position to restrict his cash holding. He can expect 
460 Human Action
that when one day it is necessary for him to increase his cash holding
he will be in a position to sell thesc goods of a high dcgree of secondary
marketability without delay at the highest price attainable at the
market. Thus the size of a man's or a firm's cash holding is influencetl
b\; whether or not he owns a stock of goods with a high degree of
sfcondary marketability. The size of cash holding and the expcnsc
incurred in keeping it can be reduced if income-producing goods of
a high degree of secondary marketability are availabie.
Consequently there emerges a specific demand for such goods on
the part of people eager to kcep them in order to reduce the costs of
cash holding. The priccs of these goods are partly determined by
this specific demand; they would be lower in its absence. Thesc goods
are secondary media of exchange, as it were, and their exchange value
is the rcsultant of two kinds of demand: the demand rclated to their
services as secondary media of exchange, and the demand related to
the other services they render.
The costs incurred by holding cash are equal to thc amount of
interest which the sum concerned would havc borne when invested.
The cost incurred by holding a stock of secondary media of exchange
consists in the difference between the interest yield of the securities
empIoyed for this purpose and the higher yield of other securities
which differ from the former only in regard to their lower marketability
and are thereforc not suitcd for the role of secondary media
of exchange.
From time immemorial jewels have been used as secondary media
of exchange. Today the secondary media of exchange commonly
used arc:
I. Claims against banks, bankers, and savings banks which-although
not money-substitutes "-arc daily maturing or can be withdrawn
on short notice.
z. Bonds whose volume and popularity are so great that it is, as a
rule. possible to sell moderate quantities of them without depressing
thc market.
;, Finally, sometimes even ccrtain especially marketablc stocks or
even commodities.
Of course, the advantages to be expected from lowering the costs
of holding cash must be confronted with certain hazards incurred.
The sale of securities and still more that of comrnoditics may only be
feasible with a loss. This danger is not present with bank balances
and the hazard of the bank's insolvency is usually negligible. Therefore
interest-bearing claims against banks and bankers, which can be
23. For instance, demand deposits not subject to check. 
Indirect Exchange
withdrawn at short notice, are the most popular secondary media of
exchange.
One must not confuse secondary media of exchange with moneysubstitutes.
Money-substitutes are in the settlement of payments
given away and receivcd like money. But the secondary ~nedia of
exchange must first be exchanged against moncy or money-substitutes
if one wants to use them-in a roundabout way-for paying or for
increasing cash holdings.
Claims employed as secondary media of exchange have, because
of this ernploymcnt, a broader market and a higher price. The outcome
of this is that they yield lower interest than claims of the same
kind which are not fit to serve as secondary media of cxchange. Government
bonds and treasury bills which can be used as secondary
media of exchange can be floated on conditions more favorable to
the debtor than loans not suitable for this purpose. The debtors concerned
are therefore eager to organize the market for their certificates
of indebtedness in such a way as to make them attractivc for those in
search of secondary media of exchange. Thcy are intent upon making
it possible for every holder of such securities to sell them or to use
them as collateral in borrowing under the most reasonablc terms. In
advertising their bond issues to the public they stress these opportunities
as a special boon.
In the same way banks and bankers are intent upon attracting demand
for secondary media of exchange. They offer convenient
terms to their customers. They try to outdo one another by shortening
the time allowed for notice. Sometimes they pay interest even
for money maturing without notice. In this rivalry some banks have
gone too far and endangered their solvency. L.
Political conditions of the last decades have given to bank balances
which can be used as secondary media of exchange an increased importance.
The governments of almost a11 countries are engaged in a
campaign against the capiralists. They are intent upon cspropriating
them by means of taxation and monetary measures. The capitalists
are eager to protect their property by keeping a pan of their funds
liquid in order to evade confiscatory measures in time. They beep
balances with the banks of those countries in which the danger of
confiscation or currency devaluation is for the moment less than in
other countries. As soon as the prospects change, they transfer their
balances into countries which temporarily seem to offer more security.
It is these funds which people have in mind when speaking of "hot
money."
The significance of hot money for the constellation of monetary 
462 Human Action
affairs is the outcome of the one-reserve system. In order to make
it easier for the central banks to embark upon credit expansion, the
European governments aimed long ago at a concentration of their
countries' gold. reserves with the central banlis. The other banks
(the private banks, i.e., those not endowed with special privileges
and not entitled to issue banknotcs) restrict their cash holdings to the
requirements of their daily transactions. They no longer keep a
reserve against their daily maturing liabilities. They do not consider
it necessary to balance the maturity dates of their liabilities and
their assets in such a way as to be any day ready to comply unaided
with their obligations to their creditors. They rely upon the central
bank. When the creditors want to withdraw more than the "normal"
arnount, the private banks borrow the funds needed from the central
bank. A private bank considers itself liquid if it owns a sufficient
amount either of collateral against which the central bank will lend
or of bills of exchange which the central bank will redisco~nt.~~
When the inflow of hot money began, the private banks of the
countries in which it was temporarily deposited saw nothing wrong
in treating these funds in the usual w-ay. They employed the additional
funds entrusted to them in increasing their loans to business. They
did not worry about the consequences, although they knew that
these funds would be withdrawn as soon as any doubts about their
country's fiscal or monetary policy emerged. The illiquidity of the
status of these banks was manifest: on the one hand large sums which
the customers had the right to withdraw at short notice, and on the
other hand loans to business which could be recovered only at a
later date. The only cautious method of dealing with hot money
would have been to keep a reserve of gold and foreign exchange
big enough to pay back the whole amount in case of a sudden withdrawal.
Of course, this method would have required the banks to
charge the customers a commission for keeping their funds safe.
The showdown came for the Swiss banks on thc day in September,
1936, on which France devalued the French franc. 'The depositors
of hot money became frightened; they feared that Switzerland might
follow the French example. It was to be expected that they would
all try to transfer their funds immediately to London or New York,
or even to Paris, which for the immediate coming weeks seemed to
offer a smaller hazard of currency depreciation. But the Swiss commercial
banks were not in a position to pay back these funds without
24. All this refers to European conditions. American conditions differ only
technically, but not economically. However, the hot-money problem is not an
American problem, as there is, under the present state of affairs, no country
which a capitalist could deem a safer refuge than the United States. 
Indirect Exchange 463
the aid of the National Bank. They had lent them to business-a great
part to business in countries which, by foreign exchange control, had
blocked their balances. The only way out would have been for them
to borrow from the National Bank. Then they would have maintained
their own solvency. But the depositors paid would have immediately
asked the hTational Bank for the redemption, in gold or
foreign exchange, of the banknotes received. If the National Bank
were not to comply with this request, it would thereby have actually
abandoned the gold standard and devalued the Swiss franc. If, on the
other hand, the Bank had redeemed the notes, it would have lost
the greater part of ics reserve. A panic would have resulted. The
Swiss then~selves would have tried to procure as much gold and
foreign exchange as possible. The whole monetary system of the
country would havc collapsed.
The only alternative for the Swiss National Bank would havc
been not to assist the private banks at all. But this would have been
equivalent to the insolvency of the country's most important credit
institutions.
Thus for the Swiss Governincnt no choice was left. It had only
one means to prevent an economic catastrophe: to follow suit forthwith
and to devalue the Swiss franc. The matter did not brook delay.
By and large, Great Britain, at the outbreak of the war in September,
1939, had to face similar conditions. The City of 1,ondon was once
the world's banking center. It has long since lost this function. But
foreigners and citizens of the Dominions still kept, on the eve of the
war, considerable short-term balances in the British banks. Besides,
there w-ere the large deposits due to the central banks in the "sterling
area." If the British Government had not frozcn all these balances by
means of foreign exchange restrictions, the insolvency of the British
banks would have become manifest. Foreign exchange control was
a disguised moratorium for the banks. It relieved them from the
plight of having to confess publicly their inability to fulfill their
obligations.
18. The Inflationist View of History
A very popular doctrine maintains that progressive lowering of
the monetary unit's purchasing power played a decisive role in historical
evoIution. It is asserted that mankind would not have reached
its present state of well-being if the supply of money had not increased
to a greater extent than the demand for money. The resulting
fall in purchasing power, it is said, was a necessary condition of
economic progress. The intensification of the division of labor and 
464 Human Action
the continuous growth of capital accumulation, which have centupled
the productivity of labor, could ensue only in a world of progressive
price rises. Inflation creates prosperity and wealth; deflation distress
and economic decay.25 A survey of political literature and of the
ideas that guided for centuries the monetary and credit policies of
the nations reveals that this opinion is almost generally accepted. In
spite of all warnings on the part of economists it is still today the core
of the layman's economic philosophy. It is no less the essence of the
teachings of Lord Keynes and his disciples in both hemispheres.
The popularity of inflationism is in great part due to deep-rooted
hatred of creditors. Inflation is considered just because it favors
debtors at the expense of creditors. However, the inflationist view
of history which we have to deaI with in this section is only loosely
related to this anticreditor argument. Its assertion that "expansionism"
is the driving force of economic progress and that "restrictionism"
is the worst of all evils is mainly based on other arguments.
Jt is obvious that the problems raised by the inflationist doctrine
cannot he solved by a recourse to the teachings of historical experience.
It is beyond doubt that the history of prices shows, by and
large, a continuous, although sometimes for short periods interrupted,
upward trend. It is of course impossible to establish this fact
otherwise than by historica1 understanding. Catallactic precision cannot
be applied to historical problems. The endeavors of some historians
and statisticians to trace back the changes in the purchasing
power of the precious metals for centuries, and to measure them, are
futile. It has been shown already that all attempts to measure economic
nlagnitudes are based on entirely falIacious assumptions and display
ignorance of the fundamental principles both of economics and of
history. But what history by means of its specific methods can tell
us in this field is enough to justify the assertion that the purchasing
power of money has for centuries shown a tendency to fall. With
regard to this point all people agree.
Hut this is not the proh!err? tc! be e!ucidatcd. T!x ql~esda!~ is v+et!?er
the fall in purchasing power was or was not an indispensable factor
in the evolution which led from the poverty of ages gone hy to the
more satisfactory conditions of modern Western capitalism. This
question must bc answered without reference to the historical experience,
which can be and always is interpreted in different ways,
and to which supporters and adversaries of every theory and of every
25. Cf. the critical study of Marianne von Herzfeld, "Die Geschichtc als Funktion
der Geldbewegung," Archiv frier Sozialwissenscbaft, LVI, 654-686, and the
writings quoted in this study. 
Indirect Exchange 465
explanation of history refer as a proof of their mutually contradictory
and incompatible statements. What is needed is a clarification
of the effects of changes in purchasing power on the division of labor,
the accumulation of capital, and tecl~nological improvement.
In dealing with this problem one cannot satisfy oneself with the
refutation of the arguments advanced by the inflationists in support
of their thesis. The absurdity of these arguments is so manifest that
their refutation and exposure is easy indeed. From its very beginnings
economics has shown again and again that assertions concerning the
alleged blessings of an abundance of money and the alleged disasters
of a scarcity of money are the outcome of crass errors in reasoning.
The endeavors of the apostles of inflationism and expansionism to
refute the correctness of the economists' teachings have failed utterly.
The only relevant question is this: Is it possible or not to lower
the rate of interest lastingly by means of credit expansion? This
problem will be treated exhaustively in the chapter dealing with the
jnterconnection between the money relation and the rate of interest.
There it wilI be shown whar the consequences of booms created by
credit expansion must be.
13ut we must: ask ourselves at this point of our inquiries whether it
is not possibIe that there are other reasons which could be advanced
in favor of the inflationary interpretation of history. Is it not possible
that the champions of inflationism have neglected to resort to
some valid arguments which could support their stand? It is certainly
necessary to approach the issue from every possible avcnue.
Let us think of a world in which the quantity of money is rigid.
At an early stage of history the inhasitants of this world have produced
the whole quantity of the commodity employed for the monetary
service which can possibly be produced. A further increase in
the quantity of money is out of the question. Fiduciary media are
unknown. All money-substitutes-the subsidiary coins included-are
money-certificates.
On these assumptions the intensification of the division of labor, the
evolution from the economic self-sufficiency of ho~iseholds, villages,
districts, and countries to the world-embracing market system of
the nineteenth century, the progressive accumulation of capital,
and the itnprovement of technological methods of production wonld
have resdted in a continuous trend toward falling prices. Would
such a rise in the purchasing power of the monetary unit have stopped
the evolution of capitalism?
The average businessn~an will answer this question in the affirmative.
Living and acting in an environment in which a slow but continu- 
466 Hzman Action
ous fall in the monctary unit's purchasing power is deemed normal,
necessary, and beneficial, he simply cannot comprehend a different
state of affairs. He associates the notions of rising prices and profits
on the one hand and of falling prices and losses on the other. The
fact that there are bear operations too and that great fortunes have
been made by bears does not shake his dogmatism. These are, he says,
merely speculative transactions of people eager to profit from the
fa11 in the prices of goods already produced and available. Creative
innovations, new investments, and the application of improved technological
methods require the inducement brought about by the expectation
of price rises. Economic progress is possible only in a world of
rising prices.
This opinion is untenable. In a world of a rising purchasing power
for the monetary unit everybody's mode of thinking would have
adjusted itself to this state of affairs, just as in our actual world it has
adjusted itself to a falling purchasing power of the monetary unit.
Today everybody is prepared to consider a rise in his nominal or
monetary income as an improvement of his material well-being.
People's attention is directed more toward the rise in nominal wage
rates and the money equivalent of wealth than to the increase in the
supply of commodities. In a world of rising purchasing power for the
monetary unit they would concern themselves more with the fall in
living costs. This would bring into clearer relief the fact that economic
progress consists primarily in making the amcnitics of life more easily
accessible.
In the conduct of business, reflections concerning the secular trend
of prices do not play any role whatever. Entrepreneurs and investors
do not bother about secular trends. What guides their actions is their
opinion about the movement of prices in the coming weeks, months,
or at most years. They do not heed the general movement of all
prices. What matters for them is the existence of discrepancies between
the prices of the complementary factors of production and the
ar?ticipated prices nf the pmdum. No hnsinessmm emharks unon r --- a -
definite production project because he beIieves that the prices, i.e., the
prices of all goods and services, will rise. He engages himself if he
believes that he can profit from a difference between the prices of
goods of various orders. In a world with a secular tendency toward
falling prices, such opportunities for earning profit will appear in the
same way in which they appear in a world with a secular trend toward
rising prices. The expectation of a general progressive upward
movement of all prices does not bring about intensified production
and improvement in well-being. It results in the "flight to real values," 
Indirect Exchange
in the crack-up boom and the complete breakdown of the monetary
system.
If the opinion that the prices of a11 comnlodities will drop becomes
general, the short-term rnarket rate of interest is lowered by the
amount of the negative price premium." Thus the entrepreneur
employing borrowed funds is secured against the consequences of
such a drop in prices to the same extent to which, under conditions of
rising prices, the lender is secured through the price premium against
the consequences of falling purchasing power.
A secular tendency toward a rise in the monetary unit's purchasing
pow-er would require rules of thumb on the part of businessmen and
investors other than those developed under the secular tendencv toward
a fall in its purchasing power. But it would certainly not influence
substantially the course of economic affairs. It would not remove
the urge of people to improve their material well-being as far
as possible by an appropriate arrangement of production. It would
not deprive the economic system of the factors making for material
improvement, namely, the striving of enterprising promoters after
profit and the readiness of the public to buy those commodities
which are apt to provide them the greatest satisfaction at the lowest
costs.
Such observations arc certainly not a plea for a policy of deflation.
They imply merely a refutation of the ineradicable inflationist fables.
They unmask the illusiveness of Lord Keynes's doctrine that the
source of poverty and distress, of depression of trade, and of unemployment
is to be seen in a "contractionist pressure." It is not true
that "a deflationary pressure . . . would have . . . prevented the
development of modern industry." It is not true that credit expansion
brings about the "n~iracle . . . of turning a stone into bread." 27
Economics recommends neither inflationary nor deflationary policy.
It does not urge the governments to tamper with the market's
choice of a medium of exchange. It establishes only the following
truths:
I. By committing itself to an inflationary or deflationary policy
a government does not promote the public welfare, the commonweal,
or the interests of the whole nation. It merely favors one or
several groups of the population at the expense of other groups.
2. It is impossible to know in advance which group will be favored
26. Cf. below, pp. j38-542.
27. Quoted from: International Clearing Uni~a, Text of a Paper Containing
Proposals by British Experts for a72 International Clearing Union, April 8, 1943
(published by British Information Services, an Agency of the British Government),
p. 12. 
468 I-luman Action
by a definite inflationary or deflationary measure and to what extent.
These effects depend on the whole complex of the market data involved.
They also depend largely on the speed of the inflationary or
deflationary movements and may be completely reversed with the
progress of these movements.
3. At any rate, an expansion results in misinvestment of capital
and overconsumption. It leavcs the nation as a whole poorer, not
richer. These problcms are dealt with in Chapter XX.
4. Continued inflation must finally end in the crack-up boom, the
complete breakdown of the currency system.
5. Deflationary policy is costly for the treasury and unpopular with
the masses. Rut inflationary policy is a boon for the treasury and very
popular with thc ignorant. PracticaIly, the danger of deflation is but
slight and the danger of inflation tremendous.
19. The Gold Standard
Men have chosen the precious metals gold and silver for the money
service on account of thcir mineralogical, physical, and chemical
features. The use of money in a market economy is a praxeologically
necessary fact. That gold-and not something else-is used as money
is merely a historical fact and as such cannot be conceived by catallactics.
In monetary history too, as in all other branches of history,
one must resort to'historical understanding. If one takes pleasure in
calling the gold standard a "barbarous relic," 28 one cannot object to
the application of the same tern1 to every historically determined institution.
Then the fact that the British speak English-and not
Danish, German, or French-is a barbarous relic too, and every
Rricon who opposes the substitution of Esperanto for English is no
less dogmatic and orthodox than those who do not wax rapturous
about the plans for a managed currency.
The demonetization of silver and the establishment of gold monorr~ctallisnl
was the outcome of delibcrate government interference
with monetary matters. It is pointless to raise the question concerning
what would have happened in the absence of these policies. But
it must not be forgotten that it was not the intention of the governments
to establish the gold standard. What the governments aimed at
was the double standard. They wanted to substitute a rigid, government-decreed
exchange ratio between gold and silver for the fluctuating
market ratios betu-een the independently cocxktent gold and
28. Lord Keynes in the speech delivered before the House of Lords, may 23.
'944 
Indirect Exchange 469
silver coins. The monetary doctrines underlying these endeavors
~nisconstrued the market phenomena in that complete way in which
only bureaucrats can misconstrue them. The attempts to create a
double standard of both metals, gold and silver, failed lamentably.
It was this failure which generated the gold standard. The emergence
of the gold standard was the ~nanifestation of a crushing defeat of the
governments and their cherished doctrines.
In the seventeenth century the rates at which the English government
tariffed the coins overvalued the guinea with regard to silver
and thus made the siIver coins disappear. Only those silver coins which
were much worn by usage or in any other way defaced or reduced in
n.eight remained in current use; it did not pay to export and to sell
then1 on the 1)ullion market. Thus England got the gold standard
against the intention of its government. Only much later the laws
made the de fncto gold standard a de jrwe standard. The government
abandoned further fruitless attempts to pump silvcr standard coins
into the market and minted silver only as subsidiary coins with a
limited legal tcnclcr power. These subsidiary coins were not money,
hut money-substitutes. Their exchange value depended not on their
silver content, but on the fact that they could be exchanged at every
instant, without dclay and without cos;, at thcir full face value against
gold. They were dc facto silvcr printed notes, claims against a definite
amount of gold.
Later in the course of the nineteenth century the double standard
resulted in a similar way in France and in the other countries of the
1,atin iMonctary Union in the emergence of de facto gold monometalI
ism. When the drop in the price of silver in the latcr 'seventies would
autornaticalIy have effected the replacement of the de facto gold
standard by the de facto silver standard, these governments suspended
the coinage of silver in ordcr to preserve the gold standard. In the
United States the price structure on the bullion market had already,
before the outbreak of the Civil War, transformed rhe legal bimetallism
into de facto gold monometallism. After the greengack period
there ensued a struggle between the friends of the gold standard on the
one hand and those of silver on the other hand. The result was a
victory for the gold standard. Once the economically most advanced
nations had adopted the gold standard, all other nations followed suit.
After the grcat inflationary adventures of the first World War most
countries hastened to return to the gold standard or the gold exchange
standard.
The gold standard was the world standard of the age of capitalism,
increasing welfare, liberty, and democracy, both political and eco- 
47O Human Action
nomic. In the eyes of the free tradcrs its main eminence was precisely
the fact that it was an international standard as rcquired by international
trade and the transactions of the international money and
capital market." It was the medium of exchange by means of which
Western industrialism and Western capital had borne Western civilization
into the remotest parts of the earth's surface, everywhere
destroying the fetters of age-old prejudices and superstitions, sowing
the seeds of new life and new well-being, frecing minds and souls,
and creating riches unheard of before. It accompanied the triumphal
unprecedented progress of Western liberalism rcady to unite all
nations into a community of free nations peacefully cooperating
with one another.
It is easy to understand why people viewed the gold standard as the
symbol of this greatest and most bencficial of all historical changes.
1111 those intent upon sabotaging the evolution toward welfare, peace,
frccdom, and democracy loathed the gold standard, and not only on
account of its cconornic significance. In their eyes the gold standard
was the labarum, the symbol, of all those doctrines and policies they
wanted to destroy. In the struggle against the gold standard much
more was at stake than commodity prices and foreign exchange rates.
The nationalists arc fighting the gold standard because they want
to sever their countries from the world market and to establish
national autarky as far as possible. Intervcntionist governmcnts and
pressure groups are fighting the gold standard because they consider
it the most scrious obstacle to their endeavors to manipulate prices and
wage rates. But the most fanatical attacks against gold are made by
those intent upon crcdit expansion. With them credit expansion is
the panacea for all economic ills. It could lower or even entirely
abolish interest rates, raise wages and prices for the benefit of all
except the parasitic capitalists and the exploiting employers, free the
state from the necessity of balancing its budget-in short, make all
decent people prosperous and happy. Only the gold standard, that
deviiifh contrivance of the wicked and stupid "orthodox" economists,
prevents mankind from attaining everlasting prosperity.
The gold standard is certainly not a perfect or ideal standard. There
is no such thing as perfection in human things. But nobody is in a
position to tell us how something more satisfactory couId be put in
place of the gold standard. The purchasing power of gold is not
stable. Rut the very notions of stability and unchangeability of purchasing
power are absurd. In a living and changing world there can-
29. T. E. Gregory, The Gold Standard and Its Future (3d ed. London, 1934),
pp. 22 ff. 
lndirect Exchange 471
not be any such thing as stability of purchasing power. In the imaginary
construction of an evenly rotating economy thcre is no
room left for a medium of exchange. It is an essential feature of
money that its purchasing pourer is changing. In fact, the adversaries
of the gold standard do not want to make money's purchasing power
stable. They want rather to give to the governments the power to
manipulate purchasing power without being hindered by an "external"
factor, namely, the money relation of the gold standard.
The main objection raised against the gold standard is that it makes
operative in the determination of prices a factor which no government
can control-the vicissitudes of gold production. Thus an
"external" or "automatic" force restrains a national government's
power to make its subjects as prosperous as it would like to make
them. The international capitalists dictate and the nation's sovereignty
becomes a sham.
However, the futility of interventionist policies has nothing at
all to do with monetary matters. It will be shown later why all isolated
measures of government interference with market phenomena must
fail to attain the ends sought. If the interventionist government wants
to remedy the shortcomings of its first interferences by going further
and further, it finally converts its country's economic system into
socialism of the German pattern. Then it abolishes the domestic market
altogether, and with it money and all monetary problems, even
though it may retain some of the terms and labels of the market
economy.30 In both cases it is not the gold standard that frustrates the
good intentions of the benevolent authority.
The significance of the fact that the gold standard makes the increase
in the supply of gold depend upon the profitability of producing
gold is, of course, that it limits the govcrnment7s power to
resort to inflation. The gold standard makes the determination of
money's purchasing power independent of the changing ambitions
and doctrines of political parties and pressure groups. This is not
a defect of the goid standard; it is its main exceiience. Every method
of manipulating purchasing power is by necessity arbitrary. All
methods recommended for the discovery of an allegedly objective
and "scientific" yardstick for monetary manipulation are based on
the illusion that changes in purchasing power can be "measured."
The goId standard removes the determination of cash-induced changes
in purchasing power from the political arena. Its general acceptance
requires the acknowledgment of the truth that one cannot make a11
people richer by printing money. The abhorrence of the gold standard
30. Cf. below, Chapters XXVII-XXXI. 
472 Human Action
is inspired by the superstition that omnipotent governments can create
wealth out of little scraps of paper.
It has been asserted that the gold standard too is a manipulated
standard. The governments may influence the height of gold's purchasing
power either by credi; expansion, even if it is kept within
the limits drawn by considerations of preserving the redeemability
of the money-substitutes, or indirectly by furthering measures which
induce people to restrict the size of their cash holdings. This is true.
It cannot be denied that the rise in commodity prices which occurred
between I 896 and 1914 was to a great extent pEovolted by such government
policies. But the main thing is that the gold standard keeps all
such endeavors toward lowering money's purchasing power within
narrow limits. The inflationists are fighting the gold standard precisely
because thev consider these limits a serious obstacle to the
realization of their plans.
What the expansionists call the defects of the gold standard are
indeed its very eminence and uscfulness. It checks large-scale inflationary
ventures on the part of governments. The gold standard
did not fail. The governments were eager to destroy it, because
they were committed to the fallacies that credit expansion is an
appropriate means of lowering the rate of interest and of "improving"
the baIance of trade.
No government is, however, powerful enough to abolish the gold
standard. Gold is the money of international trade and of the supernational
economic community of ~nankind. It cannot be affected by
measures of governments whose sovereignty is limited to definite
countries. As long as a country is not economically self-sufficient
in the strict sense of the term, as long as there are still some loopholes
left in the walls by which nationalistic governments try to isolatc
their countries from the rest of the world, gold is still used as money.
It does not matter that governments confiscate the gold coins aGd
bullion they can seize and punish those holding gold as felons. The
language of biiarerai clearing agreements by means of which governments
are intent upon eliminating gold from international trade,
avoids any reference to gold. But the turnovers performed on the
ground of those agreements are calculated on gold prices. He who
buys or sells on a foreign market calculates the advantages and disadvantages
of such transactions in gold. In spite of the fact that a
country has severed its local currency from any link with gold, its
domestic structure of prices remains closely connected with gold
and the gold prices of the world market. If a government wants to
sever its domestic price structure from that of the world market, it 
Indirect Exchange 47 3
must resort to other measures, such as prohibitive import and export
duties and embargoes. Nationalization of foreign trade, whether
effected openly or directly by foreign exchange control, does not
eliminate gold. The governments qua tradcrs are trading by the usc
of gold as a medium of exchange.
The struggle against gold which is one of the main concerns of
all contemporary governments must not be looked upon as an isolated
phenomenon. It is but one item in the gigantic process of destruction
which is the mark of our time. People fight the gold standard because
they want to substitute national autarky for free trade, war for
peace, totalitarian government omnipotence for liberty.
It may happcn one day that technology will discover a method
of enlarging the supply if gold at such a low cost that gold will become
useless for the monetary service. Then people will have to
replace the gold standard by another standard. It is futile to bother
today about the way in which this problem will be solved. We do not
know anything about thc conditions under which the decision will
have to be made.
International Monetary Cooperation
The international gold standard works without any action on the part of
governments. It is effective real cooperation of all members of the worldembracing
market economy. There is no need for any government to interfere
in order to make the gold standard work as an international standard.

What governments call international monetary cooperation is concerted
action for the sake of credit expansion. They have learned that credit expansion,
when limited to one country only, results in an external drain.
They believe that it is only the extcrnal drain that frustrates their plans of
lowering the rate of interest and thus of creating an everlasting boom. If
all governments were to cooperate in thcir expansionist policies, they think,
they could remove this obstacle. What is required is an international bank . . issuiTig fibiiciary riiedia which arc dealt with as money-su'ustim~es by aii
people in all countries.
There is no need to stress again here the point that what makes it impossible
to lower the ratc of interest by means of credit expansion is not merely
the external drain. This fundamental issue is dealt with exhaustively in
other chapters and sections of this book.31
But there is another important question to bc raised.
Let us assume that there exists an international bank issuing fiduciary
media the clientele of which is the world's whoIc population. It does not
matter whcther these money-substitutes go directly into the cash holdings
31. Cf. above, pp. 438-439, and below, pp. 547-583, 
474 Human Action
of the individuals and firms, or are only kept by the various nations' central
banks as reserves against their issuance of national money-substitutes. The
deciding point is that there is a uniform world currency. The national
banknotes and checkbook money are redeemable in money-substitutes
issued by the international bank. The necessity of keeping its national eurrency
at par with the international currency limits the power of every
nation's central banking system to expand credit. But the world bank is
restrained only by those factors which limit credit expansion on the part
of a single bank operating in an isolated economic system or in the whole
world.
We may as well assume that the international bank is not a bank issuing
money-substitutes a part of which are fiduciary media, but a world
authority issuing international fiat money. Gold has been entirely demonetized.
The only money in use is that created by the international
authority. The international authority is free to increase the quantity of
this money provided it does not go so far as to bring about the crack-up
boom and the breakdown of the currency.
Thcn the ideal of the Keynesians is realized. There is an institution
operating which can exercise an "expansionist prcssure on world trade."
It is free to pour a horn of plenty over the world.
However, the champions of such plans have neglected a fundamental
problem, namely, that of the distribution of the additional quantities of
this credit money or of this paper money.
Let us assume that the international authority increases the amount of its
issuance by a definite sum, all of which goes to one country, Ruritania. The
final result of this inflationary action will be a rise in prices of commodities
and services all over the world. But while this process is going on, the conditions
of the citizens of various countries are affected in a different way.
The Ruritanians are the first group blessed by the additional manna. They
have more money in their pockets while the rest of the world's inhabitants
have not yet got a share of the new money. They can bid higher prices,
while the others cannot. Therefore the Ruritanians withdraw more goods
from the world market than they did before. The non-Ruritanians are
forced to restrict their consumption because they cannot compete with
the higher prices paid by the Ruritanians. While the process of adjusting
prices to the altered money relation is still in progress, the Ruritanians are
in an advantageous position against the non-Ruritanians. When the process
finally comes to an end, the Ruritanians have been enriched at the expense
of the non-Ruritanians.
The main problem in such expansionist ventures is the proportion according
to which the additional money is to be allotted to the various
nations. Each nation will be eager to advocate a mode of distribution which
will give it the greatest possible share in the additional currency. The industrially
backward nations of the East will, for instance, probably recommend
equal distribution per capita of population, a mode which would
obviously favor them at the expenw of the industrially advanced nations. 
Indirect Exchange 47 5
Whatever mode may be adopted, all nations would be dissatisfied and
would complain of unfair treatment. Serious conflicts would ensue and
would disrupt the whole scheme.
It wouId be irrelevant to object that this problem did not play an important
role in the negotiations which preceded the establishment of the InternationaI
Monetary Fund and that it was easy to reach an agreement concerning
the use of the Fund's resources. The Bretton Woods Conference
was held under very particular circumstances. Most of the participating
nations were at that time entirely dependent on the benevolence of the
United States. They would have been doomed if the United States had
stopped fighting for their freedom and aiding them materially by lendlease.
The government of the United States, on the other hand, looked
upon the monetary agreement as a scheme for a disguised continuation of
lend-lease after the cessation of hostilities. The United States was ready to
give and the other participants-especially those of the European countries,
most of them at that time still entirely occupied by the German armies, and
those of the Asiatic countries-were ready to take whatever was offered to
them. The problems involved will become discernible as soon as the wartime
attitude in the United States toward financial and trade matters is
replaced by a more realistic mentality. 
XVIII. ACTION IN THE PASSING OF TIME
I. Perspective in the Valuation of Time Periods
CTING man distinguishes the time before satisfaction of a want is A attained and the time for which the satisfaction continues.
Action always aims at the removal of future uneasiness, be it only
the future of the impending instant. Between the setting in of action
and the attainment of the end sought there always elapses a fraction
of time, viz., the maturing time in which the seed sown by the action
grows to maturity. The mast obvious example is provided by agriculture.
Between the tilling of the soil and the ripening of the fruit there
passes a considerable period of time. Another example is the improvement
of the quality of wine by aging. In some cases, however, the
maturing time is so short that ordinary speech may assert that the
success appears instantly.
As far as action requires the employment of labor, it is concerned
with the working time. The performance of every kind of labor
absorbs time. In some cases the working time is so short that people
say the performance requires no time at all.
Only in rare cases does a simple, indivisible and nonrepeated act
suffice to attain the end aimed at. As a rule what separates the actor
from the goal of his endeavors is more than one step only. He must
make many steps. And every further step to be added to those previously
made raises anew the question whether or not hc should
continue marching toward the goal once chosen. Most goals are so
far away that only determined persistence leads to them. Persever-
.-- ..,.+.,,- .--n:-nl.:--l.v .--- ..- kf; dLL;VlL, UIIIIIIICLI~~I~;~~ &CLLC~ to ihe eiid soiight, is rieeded in
order to succeed. The total expenditure of time required, i.e., working
time plus maturing time, may be called the period of production.
The period of production is long in some cases and short in other
cases. It is sometimes so short that it can be entirely negIectcd in
practice.
The increment in want-satisfaction which the attainment of the
end brings about is temporally limited. The result produced extends
services only over a period of time which we may call the duration
of serviceableness. The duration of serviceableness is shorter with 
Action in the Passing of Time
some products and longer with other goods which are commonly
called durable goods. Hence acting man must always take into account
the period of production and the duration of serviceableness
of the product. In estimating the disutility of a project considered he
is not only concerned with the expenditure of material factors and
Iabor required, but also with the period of production. In estimating
the utility of the expected product he is concerned with the duration
of its serviceableness. Of course, the more durable a product is, the
greater is the amount of services it renders. But if these services are
not cumulatively available on the same date, but extended piecemeal
over a certain period of time, the time element, as will be shown,
pIays a particular role in their evaluation. It makes a difference
whether n units of service are rendered on the same date or whether
they are stretched over a period of n days in such a way that only
one unit is available daily.
It is important to realize that the period of production as well as
the duration of serviceableness arc categories of human action and
not concepts constructed by philosophers, economists, and historians
as mental tools for their in;erpretation of events. They are essential
elements present in every act of reasoning that precedes and directs
action. It is necessary to stress this point because Bijhm-Bawerli, to
whom economics owes the discovery of the role played by the period
of production, failed to comprehend the difference.
Acting man does not look at his condition with the eyes of a historian.
He is not concerned with how the present situation originated.
His only concern is to make the best use of the means available today
for the best possible removal of future uneasiness. The past does not
count for him. He has at his disposal a definite quantity of material
factors of production. He does not ask whether these factors are
nature-given or the product of production processes accomplished
in the past. It does not matter for him how great a quantity of naturegiven,
i.e., original material factors of production and labor, was
expended in rheir producrion and how much rime these processes of
production have absorbed. He values the available means exclusively
from the aspect of the services they can render him in his endeavors
to make future conditions more satisfactory. The period of production
and the duration of serviceableness are for him categories in
planning future action, not concepts of academic retrospection and
historical research. They play a role in so far as the actor has to
choose between periods of production of different length and between
the production of more durable and less durable goods.
Action is not concerned with thc future in general, but always 
478 Human Action
with a definite and limited fraction of the future. This fraction is
limited, on the one side, by the instant in which the action must take
place. Where its other end lies depends on the actor's decision and
choice. There are people who are concerned with only the impending
instant. There are other people whose provident care stretches
far beyond the prospective length of their own life. We may call the
fraction of future time for which the actor in a definite action wants
to provide in some way and to some extent, the period of provision.
In the same way in which acting man chooses among various kinds of
want-satisfaction within the same fraction of future time, he chooses
also between want-satisfaction in the nearer and in the remoter
future. Every choice implies also a choice of a period of provision.
In ~naking up his mind how to employ the various means available
for the removal of uneasiness, man also determines implicitly the
period of provision. In the market economy the demand of the consumers
also determines the length of the period of provision.
There are various methods available for a lengthening of the period
of provision:
I. The accumulation of larger stocks of consumers' goods destined
for later consumption.
2. The production of goods which are more durable.
3. The production of goods req~~iring a longer period of production.

4. The choice of methods of production consuming more time
for the production of goods which could also be produced within
a shorter period of production.
The first two methods do not require any further comment. The
third and the fourth methods must be scrutinized more closely.
It is one of the fundamental data of human life and action that
the shortest processes of production, i.e., those with the shortest
period of production, do not remove felt uneasiness entirely. If all
those goods which these shortest processes can provide are produced,
unsatisfied wants remain and incentive to further action is stiii present.
As acting man prefers those processes which, other things being
equal, produce the products in the shortest tirne'l only such processes
are left for further action which consume more time. People embark
upon these more time-consuming processes because they value the
increment in satisfaction expected more highly than the disadvantage
of waiting longer for their fruits. Bohm-Bawerk speaks of the higher
productivity of roundabout ways of production requiring more
time. It is more appropriate to speak of the higher physical producI.
Why man proceeds in this way, will be shown on the following pages. 
Action in the Passing of Tirne 479
tivity of production processes requiring more time. The higher
productivity of these processes does not always consist in the fact
that they produce-with the same quantity of factors of production
expended-a greater quantity of products. More often it consists in
the fact that they produce products which could not be produced
at all in shorter periods of production. These processes are not roundabout
processes. They are the shortest and quickest way to the goal
chosen. If one wants to catch more fish, there is no other method
available than the substitution of fishing with the aid of nets and canoes
for fishing without the aid of this equipment. There is no better,
shorter, and cheaper method for the production of aspirin known
than that adopted by the chemical plants. If onc disregards error and
ignorance, there cannot be any doubt about the highest productivity
and expediency of the processes chosen. If people had not considered
them the most direct processes, viz., those leading by the shortest way
to the end sought, they would not have adopted them.
The lengthening of the period of provision through the mere accumulation
of stocks of consumers' goods is the outcome of the desire
to provide in advance for a longer period of time. The same is valid
for the production of goods the durability of which is greater in
proportion to the greater expenditure of factors of production req~ired.~
But if temporally remoter goals are aimed at, Iengthening of
the period of production is a necessary corollary of the venture. The
end sought cannot be attained in a shorter period of production.
The postponement of an act of consumption means that the individual
prefers the satisfaction which later consumption will provide
to the satisfaction which immediate consumption could provide. The
choice of a longer period of production means that the actor values
the product of the process bearing fruit only at a later date more
highly than the products which a process consuming less time could
provide. In such deliberations and the resulting choices the period
of production appears as waiting time. It was the great contribution
of Jevons and Bohm-Bawerk to have shown the role played by taking
account of waiting time.
If acting men were not to pay heed to the length of the waiting
time, they would never say that a goal is temporally so distant that one
cannot consider aiming at it. Faced with the alternative of choosing
between two processes of production which render different output
with the same input, they would always prefer that process which
z. If the lengthening of durability were not at least proportionate to the increment
in expenditure needed, it would be more advantageous to increase the
quantity of units of a shorter durability. 
480 Human Action
renders the greater quantity of the same products or better products
in the same quantity, even if this result could be attained onIy by
lengthening the period of production. Increments in input which
result in a more than proportionate increase in the products' duration
of serviceableness would unconditionally be deemed advantageous.
The fact that men do not act in this way evidences that they value
fractions of time of the same length in a different way according as
they are nearer or remoter from the instant of the actor's decision.
Other things being equal, satisfaction in a nearer period of the future
is preferred to satisfaction in a more distant period; disutility is seen
in waiting.
This fact is already implied in the statement stressed in the opening
of this chapter that man distinguishes the time before satisfaction is
attained and the time for the duration of which there is satisfaction.
If any role at all is played by the time element in human life, there
cannot be any question of equal valuation of nearer and remoter
periods of the same length. Such an equal valuation would mean that
people do not care whether success is attained sooner or later. It
would be tantamount to a complete elimination of the time element
from the process of valuation.
The mere fact that goods with a longer duration of serviceableness
are valued more highly than those with a shorter duration does not
yet in itsclf imply a consideration of ti~ne. A roof that can protect
a house against the weather during a period of ten years is more
valuable than a roof which renders this service only for a period of
five years. The quantity of service rendered is different in both cases.
But the question which we have to deal with is whether or not an actor
in malting his choices attaches to a service to be available in a later
period of the future the same value he attaches to a service available
at an earlier period.
2. Time Preference as an EssentiaI Requisite of Action
The answer to this question is that acting man does not appraise
time periods merely with regard to their dimension. His choices regarding
the removal of future uneasiness are directed by the categories
sooner and later. Time for man is not a homogeneous substance
of which only length counts. It is not a more or a less in dimension.
It is an irreversible flux the fractions of which appear in different
perspective according to whether they are nearer to or remoter from
the instant of valuation and decision. Satisfaction of a want in the
nearer future is, other things being equal, preferred to that in the 
Action in the Pnssin.g of Time 481
farther distant future. Present goods are more valuable than future
goods.
Time prefercnce is a categorial requisite of human action. No mode
of action can be thought of in which satisfaction within a nearer
period of the future is not-other things being equal-preferred
to that in a later period. The very act of gratifying a desire implies
that gratification at the present instant is preferred to that at a later
instant. He who consumcs a nonperishable good instead of postponing
consumption for an indefinite later moment thereby revcals a higher
valuation of present satisfaction as compared with later satisfaction.
If he were not to prefer satisfaction in a nearer period of the future
to that in a remoter period, he would never consume and so satisfy
wants. He would always accumulate, he would never consume and
enjoy. He wouId not consume today, but he would not consume tomorrow
either, as the morrow would confront him with the same
alternative.
Not only the first step toward want-satisfaction, but also any
further step is guided by time prefercnce. Once the desire a: to which
the scale of values assigns the rank I is satisfied, one must choose between
the desire b to which the rank 2 is assigned and c that desire
of tomorrow to which-in the absence of time preference-the rank
I would have been assigned. If b is preferred to c, the choice clearly
involves time preference. Purposive striving after want-satisfaction
must needs be guided by a preference for satisfaction in the nearer
future over that in a remoter future.
The conditions under which modern man of the capitalist West
must act are different from those under which his primitive ancestors
lived and acted. As a result of the providential care of our forebears
we have at our disposal an ample stock of intermediate products
(capital goods or produced factors of production) and of consumers'
goods. Our activities arc designed for a longer period of provision because
we are the lucky heirs of a past which has lengthened, step by
step, the period of provision and has bequeathed to us the meam to
expand the waiting period. In acting we are concerned with longcr
periods and are aiming at an even satisfaction in all parts of the
period chosen as the period of provision. We are in a position to relv
upon a continuing influx of consun~ers' goods and have at our disposal
not only stocks of goods ready for consumption but also
stocks of pro&ccrs' goods out of which our continuous efforts again
and again make new consumers' goods mature. In our dealing with
this increasing "stream of income," says the superficial observer,
there is no heed paid to any considerations related to a different 
482 Human Action
valuation of present and of future goods. We synchronize, he asserts,
and thus the time element loses any importance for the conduct of
affairs. It is, therefore, pointless, he continues, in the interpretation
of modern conditions to resort to time preference.
The fundamental error involved in this popular objection is caused,
like so many other errors, by a lamentable misapprehension of the
imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy. In the frame
of this imaginary construction no change occurs; there prevails an
unvarying course of all affairs. In the evenly rotating economy consequently
nothing is altered in the allocation of goods for the satisfaction
of wants in nearer and in remoter periods of the future. hTo
one pIans any change because-according to our assumptions-the
prevailing allocation best serves him and because he does not believe
that any possible rearrangement could improve his condition. No
one wants to increase his consumption in a nearer period of the future
at the expense of his consumption in a more distant period or
vice versa because the existing mode of alIocation pleases him better
than any other thinkable and feasible mode.
The praxeological distinction between capital and income is a
category of thought based on a different valuation of want-satisfaction
in various periods of the future. In the imaginary construction
of the evenly rotating economy it is implied that the whole income
but not more than the income is consumed and that therefore the
capital remains unchanged. An equilibrium is reached in the allocation
of goods for want-satisfaction in different periods of the future.
It is permissible to describe this state of affairs by asserting that nobody
wants to consume tomorrow's income today. We have precisely
designed the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating economy
in such a way as to make it fit just this condition. But it is necessary
to realize that we can assert with the same apodictic assurance that,
in the evenly rotating economy, nobody wants to have more of any
commodity than he really has. These statements arc true with regard
to the evenly rotating economy because they are implied in our definition
of this imaginary construction. They are nonsensical when asserted
with regard to a changing economy which alone is real. As soon
as a change in the data occurs, the individuals are faced anew with the
necessity of choosing both between various modes of want-satisfaction
in the same period and between want-satisfaction in different
periods. An increment can be either employed for immediate consumption
or invested for further production. No matter how the
actors employ it, their choice must needs be the result of a weighing
of the advantages expected from want-satisfaction in different periods 
Action in the Passing of Time
of the future. In the world of reality, in the living and changing universe,
each individual in each of his actions is forced to choose between
satisfaction in various periods of time. Some people consume
all that they earn, others consume a part of their capital, others save
a part of their income.
Those contesting the universal validity of time preference fail to
explain why a man does not always invest a sum of ~oo dollars available
today, although these ~oo dollars would incrcase to 104 dollars
within a year's time. It is obvious that chis man in consuming this
sum today is determined by a judgment of value which values loo
present dollars higher than I 04 dollars available a year later. But even
in case he chooses to invest these loo dollars, the meaning is not that
he prefers satisfaction in a later period to that of today. It means that
he values roo dollars today less than 104 dollars a year latcr. Every
penny spent today is. precisely under the conditions of a capitalist
economy in which institutions make it possible to invest even the
smallest sums, a proof of the higher valuation of present satisfaction
as compared with later satisfaction.
The theorem of time preference must be demonstrated in a double
way. First for the case of plain saving in which people must choose
between the immediate consumption of a quantity of goods and the
later consumption of the same quantity. Second for the case of capitalist
saving in which the choice is to be made between the immediate
consumption of a quantity of goods and the later consumption either
of a greater quantity or of goods which are fit to provide a satisfaction
which-except for thc difference in time-is valued more highly. The
proof has been given for both cases. No other case is thinkable.
It is possiblc to search for a psychological understanding of the
problem of time preference. Impatience and the pains caused by
waiting are certainly psychological phenomena. One may approach
their clucidation by referring to the temporal limitations of human
life, to the individual's coming into existence, his growth and maturing,
and his inevitable decay and passing away. There is in the course
of man's life a right moment for everything as well as a too early and
a too late. However, the praxeological problem is in no way related
to psychological issues. We must conceive, not merely understand.
We must conceive that a man who docs not prefer satisfaction within
a nearer period of the future to that in a rcmotcr period would never
achieve consumption and enjoyment at all.
Neither must the praxeological problem be confused with the
physiological. He who wants to live to see the later day, must first
of all care for the preservation of his life in the intermediate period. 
484 Human Action
Survival and appeasement of vital needs are thus requirements for the
satisfaction of any wants in the remoter future. This makes us understand
why in all those situations in which bare life in the strict sense
of the term is at stake satisfaction in the nearer future is preferred to
that in later periods. But we are dealing with action as such, not with
the motives directing its course. In the same way in which as economists
we do not ask why albumin, carbohydrates, and fat are demanded
by man, we do not inquire why the satisfaction of vital needs
appears imperative and does not brook any delay. We must conceive
that consumption and enjoyment of any kind presuppose a preference
for present satisfaction to later satisfaction. The ltnowledge provided
by this insight far exceeds the orbit for which the physiological facts
concerned provide explanation. It refers to every kind of want-satisfaction,
not only to the satisfaction of the vital necessities of mere
survival.
It is important to stress this point because the term "supply of
subsistence, availabIe for advances of subsistence," as used by BijhmBawerk,
can easily be misinterpreted. It is certainly one of the tasks
of this stock to provide the means for a satisfaction of the bare necessities
of life and thus to secure survival. But besides it must be large
enough to satisfy, btyond the requirements of necessary maintenance
for the waiting time, all those wants and desires which-apart from
mere survival-are considered more urgent than the harvesting of
the physically more abundant fruits of production processes consuming
more time.
Biihm-Bawerk declared that every lengthening of the period of
production depends on the condition that "a sufficient quantity of
present goods is available to make it possible to overbridge the
lengthened average interval between the starting of preparatory work
and the harvesting of its product." The expression "sufficient quantity"
needs elucidation. It does not mean a quantity sufficient for
necessary sustenance. The quantity in question must be large enough
to secure the sarisfacrion of aii rhose wants rhe satisfacrion of which
during the waiting time is considered more urgent than the advantages
which a still greater lengthening of the period of production would
provide. If the quantity in question were smaller, a shortening of the
period of production would appear advantageous; the increase in the
quantity of products or the improvement of their quality to be expected-from
the preservation of the longer period of production
would no longer be considered a sufficient remuneration for the
3. Cf. Bohm-Bawerk, Kleinere Abhandlungen iiber Kapital und Zins, vol. I1 in
Qesamelte Schriften, ed. F. X. Weiss (Vienna, 1926), P. 1%. 
Action in the Passing of Time 485
restriction of consumption enjoined during the waiting time. Whether
or not the supply of subsistence is sufficient, does not depend on any
physiological or other facts opcn to objective determination by the
methods of technology and physiology. The metaphorical term
"overbridge," suggesting a body of water the breadth of which poses
to the bridge builder an objectively determined task, is misleading.
The quantity in question is valued by men, and their subjective judgments
decide whether or not it is sufficient.
Even in a hypothetical world in which nature provides every man
with the means for the preservation of biological survival (in the
strict sense of the term), in which the most important foodstuffs
arc not scarce and action is not concerned with the provision for bare
life, the phenomenon of time preference would be present and direct
a11 acti0ns.l
Observations on the Evolution of the Time-Preference Theory
It seems plausible to assume that the mere fact that interest is graduated
in reference to periods of time should have directed the attention of the
economists, intent upon developing a theory of interest, upon the role
played by time. However, the classical economists were prevented by their
faulty theory of value and their niisconstruction of the cost concept from
recognizing the importance of the time element.
Economics owes the time-preference theory to William Stanley Jevons
and its elaboration, most of all, to Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk. Biihnl-Bawerk
was the first to formulate correctly the problem to be solved, the first to
unmask the fallacies implied in the productivity theories and the first to
stress the role played by the period of production. But he did not entirely
succeed in avoiding the pitfalIs in the elucidation of the interest problem.
His demonstration of the universal validity of time preference is inadequate
because it is based on psychological considerations. However, psyzhology
can never demonstrate the validity of a praxeological theorem. It
may show that some people or many people let themselves be influenced
by certain motives. It can never make evident that all human action is
necessarily dominated by a definite catcgorial clement which, without
any exception, is operative in every instance of a~tion.~
The second shortcoming of Bohm-Bawerk's reasoning was his misconstruction
of the concept of the period of production. He was not fully
aware of the fact that the period of production is a praxeological category
4. Time preference is not specifically human. It is an inherent feature of the
behavior of all living beings. The distinction of man consists in the very fact that
with him time preference is not inexorable and the lengthening of the period of
provision not merely instinctive as with certain animals that store food, but the
result of a process of valuation.
5. For a detailed critical analysis of this part of Bohm-Bawerk's reasoning the
reader is referred to Mises, Nationalokonomie, pp. 439-443. 
Human Action
and that the role it plays in action consists entirely in the choices acting
man makes between periods of production of different length. The length
of time expended in the past for the production of capital goods available
today does not count at all. These capital goods are valued only with regard
to their usefulness for future want-satisfaction. The "average period
of production" is an empty concept. What determines action is the fact
that in choosing among various ways which can remove future uneasiness
the length of the waiting time in each case is a necessary element.
It was an outcome of these two errors that Bohm-Bawerk in the elaboration
of his theory did not entirely avoid the productivity approach which
he himself had so brilliantly refuted in his critical history of the doctrines
of capital and interest.
These observations do not detract at all from the imperishable merits of
Bohm-Bawerk's contributions. It was on the foundation laid by him that
later economists-foremost among them Knut Wicksell, Frank Albert
Fetter and Irving Fisher-were successful in perfecting the time-preference
theory.
It is customary to express the essence of the time-preference theory by
saying that there prevails a preference for present over future goods. In
dealing with this mode of expression some economists have been pu~zled
by the fact that in some cases present uses are worth less than future uses.
However, the problem raised by these apparent exceptions is caused merely
by an misapprehension of the true state of affairs.
There are enjoyments which cannot be had at the same time. A man cannot
on the same evening attend performances of Carmen and of liamlet.
In buying a ticket he must choose between the two performances. If tickets
to both theaters for the same evening are presented to hi~n as a gift, he must
likewise choose. He may think with regard to the ticket which he refuses:
"1 don't care for it just now," or "If only it had been later." However,
this does not mean that he prefers future goods to present goods. He does
not have to choose between future goods and present goods. He must
choose between two enjoyments both of which he cannot have together.
This is the dilemma in every instance of choosing. In the present state of
his affairs he may prefer Hamlet to Carmen. The different conditions of a
later date may possibly result in another decision.
The second seeming exception is presented by the case of pcrishable
goods. They may be available in abundance in one season of the year and
may be scarce in other seasons. However, the difference between ice in
winter and ice in summer is not that between a present good and a future
good. It is the difference between a good that loses its specific usefulness
even if not consumed and another good which requires a different process
of production. Ice available in winter can only be used in summer when
subjected to a special process of conservation. It is, in respect to ice utilizable
in summer, at best one of the complementary factors required for
production. It is impossible to increase the quantity of ice available in sum-
6. Cf. F. A. Fetter, Economic Principles (New York, rgzj), I, 239. 
Action in the Passing of Time 487
mer simply by restricting the consumption of ice in winter. The two things
are for all practical purposes different commodities.
The case of the miser does not contradict the universal validity of time
preference. The miser too, in spending some of his means for a scanty livelihood,
prefers some amount of satisfaction in the nearer future to that in
the remoter future. Extreme instances in which the miser denies himself
even the indispensable minimum of food represent a pathological withering
away of vital energy, as is the case with the man who abstains from eating
out of fear of morbific germs, the man who commits suicide rather than
mect a dangerous situation, and the man who cannot sleep because he is
afraid of undetcrmined accide~ts which could befall him w-hile asleep.
3. Capital Goods
As soon as those present wants are sated the satisfaction of which
is considered more urgent than any provision for the morrow,
people begin to save a part of the available supply of consumers' goods
for later use. This postponement of consumption makes it possible
to direct action toward temporally remoter ends. It is now feasible
to aim at goals which could not be thought of before on account of
the length of the period of production required. It is furthermore
fea5ibIe to choose methods of production in which the output of
products is greater per unit of input than in other methods requiring
a shorter period of production. The sine qua non of any lengthening
of the processes of production adopted is saving, i.e., an excess of
current production over current consumption. Saving is the first
step on the way toward irnprovement of material well-being and
toward every further progress on this way.
The postponement of consumption and the accumulation of stocks
of consumers' goods destined for later consumption would be practiced
even in the absence of the stimulus offered by the technological
superiority of processes with a longer period of production. The
higher productivity of such processes consuming more time strengthens
considerably the propensity to save. The sacrifice made by restricting
consumption in nearer periods of the future is henceforth
not only counrcrbalanced by the expectation of consuming the saved
goods in remoter periods; it also opens the way to a more ample supply
in the remoter future and to the attainment of goods which could
nit be procured at all without this sacrifice. If acting man, other conditions
being equal, were not to prefer, w-ithout exception, consumption
in the nearer future to that in the remoter future, he would always
save, ncver consume. What restricts the amount of saving and investment
is time preference. 
488 Human Action
People eager to cmbark upon processes with a longer period of
production must first accumulate, by means of saving, that quantity
of consumers' goods which is needed to satisfy, during the waitink
time, all those wants the satisfaction of which they considcr more
urgcnt than thc increment in well-being expccted from the more
time-consuming process. Accun~ulation of capital begins with the
formation of stocks of consumers' goods thc consumption of which
is postponed for latcr days. If thesc surpluses are rnerely stored and
kept for latcr consumption, they are simply wealth or, more precisely,
a reserve for rainy days and emergencies. 'lhey remain outside the
orbit of production. They become integrated-economically, not
physically-into production activities only when crnployed as means
of subsistence of workcrs engagcd in more time-consuming processes.
If expended in this way, they are physically consumed. But economically
they do not disappear. They are replaced first by the intcr-
~nediary products of a process with a longer period oi production
and then latcr by the consumers' goods which arc the final product
of these processes.
All these ventures and processes arc intcllcctually controlled by
capital accounting, the acme of cconornic calculation in monetary
terms. Without the aid of monetary calculation men could not cvcn
Iearn whether-apart from the length of the period of production-a
definite proccss pron~ises a higher productivity than another. The
cxpcnditures required by various processes cannot be weighed against
one another without the aid of monetary terms. Capital accounting
starts with thc market prices of the capital goods availabIe for further
production, the sun1 of which it calls capital. It records cvcry expenditure
from this fund and the price of all incoming items induced
by such expenditure. It establishcs finally the uItimatc outcome of all
these transformations in the composition of the capital and thereby
the success or the failure of thc whole process. It shows not only the
final result; it mirrors also every one of its intermediary stages. It
produces intcrinl balances for e;ery day such a balance hay he required
and statements of profit and loss for every part or stage of the
proccss. It is the indispcnsabIe compass of production in the market
economy.
In the market economy production is a continuous, never-ending
pursuit split up into an immense variety of partiaI proccsscs. Innumerable
proccsscs of production with different periods of production are
in progress sitnultaneously. Thcy cornplenlent one another and at
the same time are in rivalry with one another in competing for scarce
factors of production. Continuously either new capital is accumulated 
Action in the I'nssing of Time 489
by saving or previously accumulated capital is eaten up by overconsumption.
production is distributed among numerous individual
plants, farms, workshops, and enterprises each of which serves only
limited purposes. The intermediary products or capital goods, the
produced factors of further production, change hands in the course
of evcnts; they pass from one plant to another until finally the consumers'
goods reach those who use and enjoy them. The social
process of ~roduction never stops. At each instant numberless processes
are in progress some of which arc nearer to, some remoter from,
the achievement of their special tasks.
Every single performance in this ceaseIess pursuit of wealth production
is based upon the saving and the preparatory work of earlier
generations. We are the lucky heirs of our fathers and forefathers
whose saving has accumulated the capital goods with the aid of
which we are working today. We favorite children of the age of
electricity stiIl derive advantagc from the original saving of the
primitive fishermen who, in producing the first nets and canoes, devoted
a part of their working time to provision for a remoter future.
If the sons of these legendary fishermen had worn out these intermediary
products-nets and canoes-without replacing them by new
ones, they would have consumed capital and the process of saving
and capital accumulation would have had to start afresh. We are
better off than earlier generations because we are equipped with the
capital goods they have accumulated for us.7
The businessman, thc acting man, is entirely absorbed in one task
only: to take best advantage of all the means availablc for the improvement
of future conditions. He does not look at the present
state of affairs with the aim of analyzing and comprehending it. In
cIassifying the means for further iroduction and appraising their
importance he adopts superficial rules of thumb. He distinguishes
three classes of factors of production: the nature-given material
factors, the human factor-labor, and capital goods-the intermediary
factors produced in the past. Ile does not analyze the nature of the
capital goods. They are in his cyes means of increasing the productivity
of labor. QU~ nai'vely he ascrilm to them productive power
of their own. He does not trace their instrumentality bad- to nature
and labor. He does not ask how they came into existence. They count
only as far as they may contribute to the success of his efforts.
This mode of reasoning is all right for the businessman. But it was
7. These considerations explode the objections raised against the time-preference
cheory by Frank H. Knight in his arriclc, "Capital, 'Time and the Interest
Hate," Economics, n.s., I, 257-286. 
490 Human Action
a serious mistake for the economists to agree with the businessman's
superficial view. They erred in classifying "capital" as an independent
factor of production along with the nature-given material resources
and labor. The capital goods-the factors of further production produced
in the past-are not an independent factor. They are the joint
products of the cooperation of the two original factors-nature and
labor-expended in the past. They have no productive power of
their own.
Neither is it correct to call the capital goods labor and nature
stored up. They are rather labor, nature, and time stored up. The
difference between production without the aid of capital goods and
that assisted by the employment of capital goods consists in time.
Capital goods are intermediary stations on the way leading from the
very beginning of production to its final goal, the turning out of
consumers' goods. He who produces with the aid of capital goods
enjoys one great advantage over the man who starts without capital
goods; he is nearer in time to the ultimate goal of his endeavors.
There is no question of an aIleged productivity of capital goods.
The difference between the price of a capital good, e.g., a machine,
and the sum of the prices of the complementary original factors of
production required for its reproduction is entirely due to the time
difference. He who employs the machine is nearer the goal of production.
The period of production is shorter for him than for a competitor
who must start from the beginning. In buying a machine he
buys the original factors of production to be expended in its reproduction
plus time, i.e., the time by which his period of production is
shortened.
The value of time, i.e., time preference or the higher valuation of
want-satisfaction in nearer periods of the future as against that in
remoter periods, is an essential element in human action. It determines
every choice and every action. There is no man for whom the difference
between sooner and later does not count. The time element is
instrumental in the formation of all prices of all commodities and
services.
4. Period of Production, Waiting Time, and
Period of Provision
If one were to measure the length of the period of production spent
in the fabrication of the various goods available now, one would
have to trace back their history to the point at which the first expenditure
of original factors of production took place. One would 
Action in the Passing of Time 497
have to establish when natural resources and labor were first employed
for processes which-besides contributing to the production
of other goods-also contributed ultimately to the production of
the good in question. The solution of this problem would require
the solubiIity of the problem of physical imputation. It would be
necessary to establish in quantitative terms to what extent tools,
raw materials, and labor which directly or indirectly were used in
the production of the good concerned contributed to the result. One
would have to go back in these inquiries to the very origins of capital
accunmlation by saving on the part of people who previously lived
from band to mouth. It is not only practical difficulties which prevent
such historical studies. The very insolubility of the problem of physical
imputation stops us at the first step of such ventures.
Keither acting man himself nor economic theory needs a measurement
of the time expended in the past for the production of goods
available today. They would have no use for such data even if they
kncw them. Acting man is faced with the problem of how to take
bcst advantage of the available supply of goods. He makes his choices
in employing each part of this supply in such a way as to satisfy
the most urgent of the not yet satisfied wants. For the achievcment
of this task he must know the length of the waiting time which separates
him from the attainment of the various goals among which he has
to choose. As has been pointed out and must be emphasized again,
there is no need for him to look backward to the history of the
various capital goods available. Acting man counts waiting time and
the period of production always from today on. In the same way in
which there is no need to know whether more or less labor and
material factors of production have been expendcd in the production
of the products available now, there is no need to know whether their
production has absorbed more or less time. Things are valued exclusively
from the point of view of the services they can render for
the satisfaction of future wants. The actual sacrifices made and the
time absorbed in their production are beside the point. These things
belong to the dead past.
It is necessary to realize that all cconomic categories are related
to human action and have nothing at a11 to do directly with the
physical properties of things. Economics is not about goods and
services; it is about human choice and action. The praxeological concept
of time is not the concept of physics or biology. It refers to the
sooner or thc later as operative in the actors' judgments of vaIue. The
distinction between capital goods and consumers' goods is not a rigid
distinction based on the physical and physiological properties of the 
492 Human Action
goods concerned. It depends on the position of the actors and the
choices they have to make. The same goods can be looked upon as
capital goods and as consun~ers' goods. A supply of goods ready for
immediate enjoyment is capital goods from the point of view of a
man who looks upon it as a means for his own sustenance and that of
hired worlrcrs during a waiting time.
An increase in the quantity of capital goods available is a necessary
condition for thc adoption of processes in which the period of
production and therefore waiting time are longer. If one wants to
attain ends which are temporally farther away, one must resort to
a longer period of production bccause it is impossible to attain the
end sought in a shorter period of production. If one wants to resort
to methods of production with which the quantity of output is higher
per unit of input expended, one must lengthen the period of production.
For the processes with which output is smaller per unit of input
have been chosen only on account of the shorter period of production
they require. But on the other hand, not cvcry employment chosen for
the utilization of capital goods accumulated by means of additional
saving requires a process of production in which the period of production
from today on to the maturing of the product is longer than
with all processes already adopted previously. It may be that pcoplc,
having satisfied thcir more urgent needs, now want goods which
can be produced w-ithin a comparatively short period. The reason
why these goods have not been produced previously was not that the
period of production required for them alone was deemed too long,
but that there was a more urgent employment open for the factors
required.
If one chooses to assert that every increase in the supply of capital
goods available rcwlts in a Iengthening of the period of production
and of waiting timc, one reasons in thc following way: If n are the
goods already previously produced and b the goods p;oduced in the
new processes startcd with thc aid of the increase in capital goods,
it is obvious that people had to wait longer for a and b than they had
to wait for a alone. In ordcr to producc rr and b it was not only necessary
to acquire the capital goods required for the production of a,
but also those required for the production of b. If one had expended
for an increase of immediate consumption the means of sustenance
savcd to make workcrs available for the production of b, one would
have attained the satisfaction of some wants sooner.
The treatment of the capital problem customary with those economists
who are opposed to the so-called "Austrian" view assumes that
the technique cmployed in production is unalterably determined by 
Action in the Passing of Time 49 3
the given state of technological knowledgc. The "Austrian" economists,
on the other hand, show that it is the supply of capital goods
available at cach momcnt that determines which of the many known
technological methods of production will be empl~yed.~ The correctness
of thc "Austrian" point of view can easily be demonstrated
by a scrutiny of the problem of scarcity of capital.
Let us look at thc condition of a country suffering from scarcity of
capital. Take, for instance, the state of affairs in Rumania about I 860.
What was lacking was ccrtainly not technological knowledge. There
was no secrecy concerning the technological methods practiced by
the advanced nations of the West. l'hey were described in innumerable
books and taught at many schools. The elite of Rumanian youth
had received full information about thcm at the technological universities
of Austria, Switzerland, and France. Hundreds of foreign
experts were ready to apply their knowledge and skill in Rumania.
What was wanting was the capital goods needed for a transformation
of the backward Rumanian apparatus of production, transportation,
and communication according to Western patterns. If the aid granted
to the Rumanians on the part of the advanced foreign nations had
consisted merely in providing them with technological knowledge,
they would have had to rcalize that it would take a very long time
until they caught up with the West. The first thing for them to have
done would haw been to savc in order to make workers and material
factors of production available for the performance of more timeconsuming
proccsscs. Only then could they succcssivcly produce the
tools required for the construction of those plants which in the further
course were to produce the equipment needed for the construction
and operation of modcrn plants, farms, mines, railroads, telegraph
lines, and buildings. Scores of decades would have passed until they
had made up for the time lost. There would not have been any means
of accelerating this process than by restricting current consumption
as far as physiologically possible for the intermediary period.
However, things devclopcd in a different way. The capitalist
West lent to the backward countries the capital ioocls needed for
an instantaneous transformation of a great part of their methods of
production. It saved them time and made it possible for them to
multiply very soon the productivity of their labor. The effect for
8. Cf. F. A. Hayek, ?'be Pure Theory of Capital (London, ~gqr), p. 48. It is
awkward indeed to attach to certain lines of thought national labels. As Hayck
remarks pertinently (p. 47, n. I), the classical English economists since Ricardo,
and particularly J. S. Mill (the latter probably partly under the influence of J.
Rae) were in some regards more "Austrian" than their recent Anglo-Saxon
successors. 
494 Human Action
the Rumanians was that they could immediatel\; enjoy the advantages
derived from the modern technological procedures. It was as if they
had started at a much earlier date to save and to accumulate capital
goods.
Shortage of capital means that one is further away from the attainment
of a goal sought than if one had started to aim at it at an
earlier date. Because one neglected to do this in the past, the intermediary
products are wanting, although the nature-given factors
from which they are to be produced are availablc. Capital shortage
is dearth of time. It is the effect of the fact that one was late in
beginning the march toward the aim concerned. It is impossible to
dcscribe the advantages derived from capital goods available and
the disadvantages resulting from the paucity of capital goods without
resorting to the time element of sooner and later.g
To have capital goods at one's disposal is tantamount to being nearer
to a goal aimed at. An increment in capital goods available makes it
possible to attain temporally remoter ends without being forced to
restrict consumption. A loss in capital goods, on the other hand, makes
it necessary either to abstain from striving after certain goals which
one could aim at before or to restrict consumption. To havc capita1
goods means, other things being equa1,'O a temporal gain. As against
those who lack capital goods, the capitalist, under the given state of
technological knowledge, is in a position to reach a definite goal
sooner without restricting consumption and without increasing the
input of labor and nature-given material factors of production. His
head start is in time. A rival endowed with a smaller supply of capital
goods can catch up only by restricting his consumption.
The start which the peoples of the West have gained over the other
peoples consists in the fact that they havc long since crcated the
political and. institutional conditions required for a smooth and by
and large uninterrupted progress of the process of larger-scalc saving,
capital accumulation, and investment. Thus, by the middle of the
nineteenth century, they had aiready attained a state of w-eii-being
which far surpassed that of poorer races and nations less successful
in substituting the ideas of acquisitive capitalism for those of predatory
militarism. Left alone and unaided by foreign capital these backward
peoples would have needed much more timc to improvc their methods
of production, transportation, and communication.
It is impossible to understand the course of world affairs and the
9. Cf. W. S. Jevons, The Theory of Political Economy (4th ed. London, 1p4),
PP. 224-229.
10. This implies also equality in the quantity of nature-given factors available. 
Action ir2 the Passing of Time 495
development of the relations benveen West and East in the last
centuries, if one does not comprehend the importance of this largescale
transfer of capital. Tbc West has given to the East not only
technological and therapeutical knowledge, but also the capital goods
needed for an immediate practical application of this knowledge.
These nations of Eastern Europe, Asia, and Africa have been able,
thanks to the foreign capital imported, to reap the fruits of modern
industry at an earlier date. They were to some extent relieved from
the necessity of restricting their consumption in order to accumulate
a sufficient stock of capital goods. This was the true nature of the
alleged exploitation of the backward nations on the part of Western
capitalism about which their nationaIists and the Marxians lament.
It was a fecundation of the economically backward nations by the
wealth of the more advanced nations.
The benefits derived were mutual. What impelled the capitalists
of the West to embark upon foreign investment was the demand
of the consumers. Consumers asked for goods which could not be
produced at a11 at home and for a'cheapening of goods which could
be produced at home only with rising costs. If the consumers of the
capitalist West had behaved in a different way or if the institutional
obstacles to capital export had proved insurmountable, no capital
export would have occurred. There would have been more longitudinal
expansion of domestic production instead of lateral expansion
abroad.
It is not the task of catallactics but of history to deal with the consequences
of the internationalization of the capital market, its working,
and its final disintegration brought about by the expropriation
policies adopted by the receiving countries. Catallactics has only to
scrutinize the effects of a richer or poorer supply of capital goods.
We compare the conditions of two isolated market systems A and
B. Both arevequal in size and population figures, the state of technological
knowledge, and in natural resources. They differ from one
another only in the supply of capita1 goods, this supply being larger
in A than in B. This enjoins that in A many processes of production
are employed with which the output is greater per unit of input than
with those employed in B. In B one cannot consider the adoption of
these processes on account of the comparative scarcity of capital
goods. Their adoption wouId require a restriction of consumption.
In B many manipulations are performed by manual labor which in
A are performed by labor-saving machines. In A goods are produced
with a longer durability; in B one must abstain from producing them
although the lengthening of durability is obtained by a less than 
496 Human Action
proportionate increase in input. In A the productivity of labor and
consequently wage rates and the standard of living of the wage
earners are higher than in B.I1
Prolongation of the Period of Provision Beyond the Expected
Duration of tl~e Actor's Life
The judgments of value which determine the choice between satisfaction
in nearer and in remoter periods of the future are expressive of present
valuation and not of future valuation. They weigh the significance attached
today to satisfaction in the nearer future against the significance
attached today to satisfaction in the remoter future.
The uneasiness which acting man wants to remove as far as possible is
always present uneasiness, i.e., uneasiness felt in the very moment of action,
and it always refers to future conditions. The actor is discontented today
with thc expected state of affairs in various periods of the future and tries
to alter it through purposive conduct.
If action is primarily directed toward the improvement of other people's
conditions and is thcrefore col-nmonly called altruistic, the uneasiness the
actor wants to remove is his own present dissatisfaction with thc expected
state of other people's affairs in various periods of the future. In taking
care of other people he aims at alleviating his own dissatisfaction.
It is thcrefore not surprising that acting man often is intent upon prolonging
the period of provision beyond the expected duration of his own
life.
Some Applications of the Time-Preference Theory
Every part of economics is open to intentional misrepresentation and
misinterpretation on the part of people eager to excuse or to justify fallacious
doctrines underlying their party programs. To prevent such misuse
as far as possible it seems expedient to add some explanatory remarks to the
exposition of the time-preference theory.
There are schools of thought which flatly deny that men differ with regard
to innate characteristics inherited from their anccst~rs.~Vn the
opinion of these authors the only difference between the white men of TT, vvestern civiiizatior~ a11d Eskimos is that the her are in arrears in their
progress toward modern industrial civilization. This merely temporal
difference of a few thousand years is insignificant when comparcd with
the many hundreds of thousands of years which were absorbed by man's
evolution from the simian state of his apelike forebears to the conditions
of present-day homo sapiens. It does not support the assumption that racial
differences prevail between the various specimens of mankind.
11. Cf. John Bates Clark, Essentials of Economic Tbeory (New York, 1907),
pp. '33 ff.
12. About thc Marxian attack against genetics, cf. T. D. Lysenko, Heredity
and Variability (New York, 1945). A critical appraisal of this controversy is provided
by J. R. Baker, Science and the Planned State (hTew York, rg45), pp. 71-76. 
Action in the Passing of Time 497
Praxeology and economics are foreign to the issues raised by this controversy.
But they must take precautionary measures lest they become
implicated by partisan spirit in this clash of antagonistic ideas. If those
fanatically rejecting the teachings of modern genetics were not entirely
ignorant of economics, they would certainly try to turn the time-prefercnce
theory to their advantage. They would refer to the circumstance
that the superiority of the Western nations consists merely in their having
started earlier in endeavors to save and to accumuIate capital goods. They
would explain this temporal difference by accidental factors, the better
opportunity offered by environment.
Against such possible misinterpretations one must emphasize the fact
that the temporal head start gained by the Western nations was conditioned
by ideological factors which cannot be, rcduced simply to the operation of
environment. What is called human civilization has up to now been a progress
from cooperation by virtue of hegemonic bonds to cooperation by
virtue of contractual bonds. But while many races and peoples were arrested
at an early stage of this movement, others kept on advancing. The
eminence of the Western nations consisted in the fact that they succeeded
better in checking the spirit of predatory militarism than the rest of rnankind
and that they thus brought forth the social institutions required for
saving and investment on a broader scale. Even Marx did not contest the
fact that private initiative and private ownership of the means of production
were indispensable stages in the progress from primitive man's penury
to the more satisfactory conditions of nineteenth-century Western Europe
and North America. What the East lndies, China, Japan, and the Mohammedan
countries lacked were institutions of safeguarding the individual's
rights. The arbitrary administration of pashas, kadis, rajahs, mandarins, and
daimios was not conducive to large-scale accumulation of capital. The legal
guarantees effectively protecting the individual against expropriation and
confiscation were the foundations upon which the unprecedented economic
progress of the West came into flowcr. These laws were not an outgrowth
of chance, historical accidents, and geographical environment.
They were the product of reason.
We do not know what course the history of Asia and Africa would have
taken if these peoples had been left alone. What happened was that some
of these peoples were subject to European rule and others-like China and
Japan-wcre forced by the display of naval power to open their frontiers.
The achievements of Western industrialism came to them from abroad.
They w-ere ready to take advantage of the foreign capital lent to them and
invested in their territories. But they were rather slow in the reception of
the ideologies from which modern industrialism had sprung. Their assimilation
to Western ways of life is superficial.
We are in the midst of a revolutionary process which will very soon do
away with all varieties of colonialism. This revolution is not limited to
those countries which were subject to the ruIe of thc British. thc French
and the Dutch. Even nations which without any infringement of their 
498 Human Action
political sovereignty had profited from foreign capital are intent upon
throwing off what they call the yoke of foreign capitalists. They are expropriating
the foreigners by various devices-discriminatory taxation, rcpudiation
of debts, undisguised confiscation, foreign exchange restrictions.
We are on the eve of the complete distintegration of the international
capital market. The economic consequences of this event are obvious; its
political repercussions are unpredictable.
In order to appreciate the political consequences of the disintegration of
the international capital market it is necessary to remember what effects
were brought about by the internationalization of the capital market.
Under the conditions of the later nineteenth century it did not matter
whether or not a nation was prepared and equipped with the required
capital in order to utilize adequately the natural resources of its territory.
There was practically free access for everybody to every area's natural
wealth. In searching for the most advantageous opportunities for investment
capitalists and promoters were not stopped by national borderlines.
As far as investment for the best possible u'tilization of the known natural
resources was concerned, the greater part of the earth's surface could be
considered as integrated into a uniform world-embracing market system.
It is true that this resuIt was attained in some areas, like the British and the
Dutch East Indies and Malaya, only by colonial regimes and that autochthonous
governments of these territories would probably not have created
the institutional setting indispensable for the importation of capital. But
Eastern and Southern Europe and the Western Hemisphere had of their
own accord joined the community of the international capita1 market.
'The Marxians were intent upon indicting foreign loans and investments
for the lust for war, conquest, and colonial expansion. In fact the internationalization
of the capital market, together with free trade and the freedom
of migration, was instrumental in removing the economic incentives
to war and conquest. It no longer mattered for a man where the political
boundaries of his country were drawn. The entrepreneur and the investor
were not checked by them. Precisely those nations which in the age preceding
the first World War were paramount in foreign lending and investment
were committed to the ideas of peace-loving "decadent" liberalism.
Of the foremost aggressor nations Russia, Italy, and Japan were not capital
exporters; they themseives needed foreign capitai for the deveiopment of
their own natural resourccs. Germany's imperialist adventures were not
supported by its big business and finance.13
The disappearance of the international capital market alters conditions
entireIy. It abolishes the freedom of access to natural resourccs. If one of
the socialist governments of the economically backward nations lacks the
capital needed for the utilization of its natural resources, there will be no
means to remedy this situation. If this system had been adopted a hundred
years ago, it would have been impossible to exploit the oil fields of Mexico,
13. Cf. ~Mises, Omnipotent Government (New Haven, 1944)- p. 99 and thc
books quoted there. 
Action in the Passing of Time
Venezuela, and Iran, to establish the rubber plantations in Malaya or to
develop the banana production of Central America. It is illusoxy to assume
that the advanced nations will acquiesce in such a state of affairs. They will
resort to the only method which gives them access to badly needed raw
materials; they wiIl resort to conquest. War is the alternative to freedom of
foreign investment as realized by the international capital market.
The inflow of foreign capital did not harm the receiving nations. It was
European capital that accelerated considerably the marvelous economic
evolution of the United States and the British Dominions. Thanks to
foreign capital the countries of Latin America and Asia are today equipped
with facilities for production and transportation which they would have
had to forego for a very long time if they had not received this aid. Real
wage rates and farm yields are higher today in those areas than they would
have been in the absence of foreign capital. The mere fact that almost all
nations are vehemcntly asking today for American credits explodes the
fables of the Marxians and the nationalists.
However, the mere lust for imported capital goods does not resuscitate
the international capital market. Investment and lending abroad are only
possible if the recciving nations are unconditionally and sincerely committed
to the principle of private property and do not plan to expropriate the
foreign capitalists at a later date. It was such expropriations that destroyed
the international capital market.
Intergovernmental loans are no substitute for the functioning of an international
capital market.
even if there were free trade for products, this tendency is absent in
our real worId of migration barriers and institutions hindering foreign
investment of capital. The marginal productivity of labor is higher
in the United States than it is in China because capital invested per head
of the working population is greater, and because Chinese workers are
prevented from moving to America and competing on the American
4. For a detailed analysis, cf. above, p. 623. 
746 Human Action
labor market. There is no need, in dealing with the explanation of this
difference, to investigate whether natural resources are or are not
more abundant in America than in China and whether or not the
Chinese worker is racially inferior to the American worker. However
this may be, these facts, namely, the institutional checks upon the mobility
of capital and labor, suffice to account for the absence of the
equalization tendency. As the abolition of the American tariff could
not affect these two facts, it could not impair the standard of living
of the A~nerican wage earner in an adverse sense.
On the contrary. Given a state of affairs in which the mobility of
capital and labor is restricted, the transition to free trade for products
must necessarily raisc the American standard of life. Those industries
in which American costs are higher (American productivity is lower)
would shrink and those in which costs are lower (productivity is
higher) would expand.
It is certainly true that wage rates in Swiss watchmaking and in
Chinese embroidering are low when compared with wage rates in
the competing American industries. Under free trade the Swiss and
the Chinese would expand their sales on the American market and the
sales of their American competitors would shrink. But this is only
a part of the conseqllences of free trade. Selling and producing more,
the Swiss and Chinese would earn and buy more. It does not matter
whether they themselves buy more of the products of other American
industries or whether they increase their domestic purchases and those
in other countries, for instance, in France. Whatever happens, the
equivaIent of the additional dollars they earned must finally go to the
United States and increase the sales of some American industries. If the
Swiss and Chinese do not give away their products as a gift, they must
spend these dollars in buying.
The popular opinion to the contrary is due to the illusory idea that
America could expand its purchases of imported products by reducing
the total sum of its citizens' cash holdings. This is the notorious fallacy
according to whirh pcnple buy withol~t regd to the size of thcir
cash holdings, and according to which the very existence of cash
holdings is simply the outcome of the fact that something is left over
because there is nothing more to buy. We have already shown whv
this Mercantilist doctrine is entirely wrong.5
What the tariff really brings about in the field of wage rates and
the wage earners' standard of living is something quite different.
In a world in which there is free trade for commodities, while the
migration of workers and foreign investment are restricted, there pre-
5. See above, pp. 445-449. 
Restriction of Production 747
vails a tendency toward an establishment of a definite relation between
the wages paid for the same kind and quality of labor in various
countries. There cannot prevail a tendency toward an equalization
of wage rates. But the final price to be paid for labor in various
countries is in a certain numerical relation. This final price is characterized
by the fact that all those eager to earn wages get a job and all
those eager to employ workers are able to hire as many hands as they
want. There is "full employment."
Let us assume that there are two countries only-Ruritania and
Mauretania. In Ruritania the final wage rate is double what it is in
Mauretania. Now the government of Ruritania resorts to one of those
measures which are erroneously styled "prolabor." It burdens the
employers with an additional expenditure the si7.e of which is proportional
to the number of workers employed. For example, it reduces
the hours of work without ~ermitting acorresponding drop in weekly
wage rates. The result is a drop in the quantity of goods produced and
a rise in the price of the unit: of every good. The individuaI worker
enjoys more leisure, but his standard of living is curtailed. What else
could a general decrease in the quantity of goods availablc bring
about?
This outcome is an internal event in Ruritania. It would emerge also
in the absence of any foreign trade. The fact that Ruritania is not
autarkic, but buys from and sells to Mauretania, does not alter its
essential features. But it implicates Mauretania. As the Ruritanians
produce and consume less, they will buy less from Mauretania. In
Mauretania there will not be a general drop in production. But some
industries which produced for export to Ruritania will henceforth
have to produce for the domestic Mauretanian marltct. Mauretania
will see the volume of its foreign trade drop; it will become, willy-nilly
more autarkic. This is a blessing in the eyes of the protectionists. In
truth, it means deterioration in the standard of living; production at
higher costs is substituted for that at lower costs. What Mauretania
experiences is the same thing that the residents of an autarkic country
would experience if an act of God were to curtail the productivity of
onc of the country's industries. As far as there is division of labor,
everybody is affected by a drop in the amount other people contribute
to supplying the market.
However, these inexorable final international conscquences of
Ruritania's new pro-labor law will not affect the various branches of
Mauretania7s industry in the same way. A sequence of steps is needed
in both countries until at last a perfect adjustment of production to
the new state of data is brought about. These short-run effects are 
748 Human Action
different from the long-run effects. They are more spectacular than
the long-run effects. While hardly anybody can fail to notice the
short-run effects, the long-run effects are recognized only by economists.
While it is not difficult to conceal the long-run effects from
the public, something must be done about the easily recognizable
short-run effects lest the enthusiasm for such allcgcdly pro-labor
legislation fade away.
The first short-run effect to appear is the weakening of the competitive
power of some Ruritanian branches of production as against those
of Mauretania. As prices rise in Ruritania, it becomes possible for
some Maurctanians to cxpand their sales in Ruritania. This is a temporary
effect only; in the end the total sales of all Mauretanian industries
in Ruritania will drop. It is possible that in spite of this general drop
in the total amount of Mauretanian exports to Ruritania, some of the
Mauretanian industries will expand their sales in the long run. (This
dcpcnds on the new configuration of comparative costs.) But there is
no necessary interconnection between these short-run and long-run
effects. The adjustments of the period of transition create kaleidoscopically
changing situations which may differ entirely from the final outcome.
Yet the short-sighted public's attcntion is cornpletcly absorbed
by these short-run effects. 'They hear the businessmen effcctcd cornpiah
that the new Ruritanian law gives to Mauretanians the opportunity
to undersell both in Ruritania and in Mauretania. They see that
some Ruritanian businessmen are forced to restrict their production
and to dischargc workers. And they begin to suspect that something
may be wrong with the teachings of the self-styled "unorthodox
friends of labor."
But the picture is different if there is in Ruritania a tariff high
enough to prevent Mauretanians from even temporarily expanding
their sales on the Ruritanian market. Then the most spectacular shortrun
effects of the new measure are masked in such a way that the
public does not become aware of them. The long-run effects, of nr\~xrca nnnnnc ha n-7rx:,l-rl R.,c CL,~ ,,, I. ,. LC ,l.,.,c L., ,,,+l.,.. LVLIA~~, LauuuL UL avuIuLu. ULIL LJIL dlc LJLULI~LIL ~LJIJUL LJ) alluLuc1
sequence of short-run effects which is less offensive because ~Ess visible.
The talk about alleged "social gains" produced by the shortening of
the hours of work is not exploded by the immehiate emergence of
effects which everyone, and most of all the discharged workers, consider
undesirable.
The main function of tariffs and other protectionist devices today is
to disguise the real effects of interventionist policies designcd to raise
the standard of living of the masses. Economic nationalism is the
necessary complement of these popular policies which pretend to 
Restriction of Productio~z 749
improve the wage earners' material well-being while they are in fact
impairing itnG
4. Restriction as an Econon~ic System
There are, as has been shown, cases in which a restrictive measure
can attain the end sought by its application. If those resorting to such
a measure think that the attainment of this goal is more important
than the disadvantages brought about by the restriction-i.e., the
curtailment in the quantity of material goods available for consumption-the
recourse to restriction is justified from the point of view
of their value judgments. They incur costs and pay a price in ordcr
to get something that they value more than what they had to expend
or to forego. Nobody, and certainly not the theorist, is in a position
to argue with them about the propriety of their value judgments.
The only adequate mode of dealing with measures restricting pro.
duction is to look at them as sacrifices made for the attainment of a
definite end. They are quasi-expenditures and quasi-consumption.
They are an employment of things that could be produced and consumed
in one way for the realization of certain other ends. These
things are prevented from coming into existence, but this quasiconsumption
is precisely what satisfies the authors of these measures
better than the increase in goods available which the omission of the
restriction would have produced.
With certain restrictive measures this point of view is universally
adopted. If a government decrees that a piece of land should be kept
in its natural state as a national park and should be withheld from any
other utilization, nobody would classify such a venture as anything
else than an expenditure. The government deprives the citizens of
the increment in various products which the cultivation of this land
could bring about, in ordcr to provide them with another satisfaction.

it ioiiows hat restricrion of production can never piay any roie
other than that of an ancillary complement of a system of production.
One cannot construct a system of economic action out of such restrictive
measures alone. No complex of such measures can be linked
together into an integrated economic system. They cannot form a
system of production. They belong in the sphere of consumption, not
in the sphere of production.
In scrutinizing the problems of interventionism w-e are intent upon
examining the claims of the advocates of government interference with
6. See also what has been said about the function of cartels on pp. 362-366. 
7 So Human Action
business that their system offers an alternative to other economic
systems. No such claim can reasonably be raised with regard to
measures restricting production. The best they can attain is curtailment
of output and satisfaction. Wealth is produced by expending
a certain quantity of factors of production. Curtailing this quantity
does not increase, but decreases, the amount of goods produced. Even
if the ends aimed at by shortening the hours of work could be attained
by such a decree, it would not be a measure of production. It is invariably
a way of cutting down output.
Capitalism is a system of social production. Socialism, say the socialists,
is also a system of social production. But with regard to measures
restricting production, even the interventionists cannQt raise a similar
claim. They can only say that under capitalism too much is produced
and that they want to prevent the production of this surplus in order
to realize other ends. They themselves must confess that there are
limits to the application of restriction.
Economics does not contend that restriction is a bad system of production.
It asserts that it is not a system of production, at all, but rather
a system of quasi-consumption, Most of the ends the interventionists
want to attain by restriction cannot be attained this way. But even
where restrictive measures are fit to attain the ends sought, they are
only restrictive.?
The enormous popularity which restriction enjoys in our day is
due to the fact that people do not recognize its consequences. In dealing
with the problem of shortening the hours of work by government
decree, the public is not aware of the fact that total output must drop
and that it is very probable that the wage earners' standard of living
will be potentially lowered too. It is a dogma of present-day "unorthodoxy"
that such a "prolabor" measure is a "social gain" for the
workers and that the costs of these gains fall entirely upon the employers.
Whoever questions this dogma is branded as a "sycophantic"
apologist of the unfair pretensions of rugged exploiters, and pitilessly
persecuted. It is insinuated that he wants to reduce the wage earners
to the poverty and the long working hours of the early stages of
modern industrialism.
As against all this slander it is important to emphasize again that
what produces wealth and well-being is production and not restriction.
That in the capitalist countries the average wage earner consumes
more goods and can afford to enjoy more leisure than his ancestors,
and that he can support his wife and children and need not send them
7. As for the objections raised against this thesis from the point of view of the
Ricardo effect, see beIow, pp. 767-770. 
Restriction of Production 751
to work, is not an achievement of governments and labor unions. It
is the outcome of the fact that profit-seeking business has accumulated
and invested more capital and thus increased a thousandfold the
productivity of labor. 
XXX. INTERFERENCE WITH THE STRTJCTURE
OF PRICES
I. The Govcrnrnent and the Autonomy of the Market
~RFERENCE with the structure of the market means that the I"'" authority aims at fixing prices for commodities and services and
interest rates at a height different from what the unhampered ~narket
would have determined. It decrees, or empowers--either tacitly or
expressly--definite groups of people to decree, prices and rates which
are to be considered either as maxima or as minima, and it provides for
the enforcement of such decrees by coercion and compulsion.
In resorting to such measurcs the government wants to favor either
the buyer-as in the case of maximum prices-or the seller-as in
the case of minimum prices. The maximum price is designed to niakc
it possible for the buyer to procure what he wants at a price lower than
that of the unhampered market. The minimum price is designed to
make it possiblc for the seller to disposc of his merchandise or his
services at a price higher than that of the unhampered market. It
depends on the political balance of forces which groups the authority
wants to favor. At times governments have resorted to maximum
prices, at other times to minimum prices for various commodities. At
times they have decreed maximum wage rates, at other times minimum
wage rates. It is only with regard to intcrcst that they have nevcr had
recourse to minimum rates; when they have interfered, they have always
decreed maximum interest rates. They have always looked
askance upon saving, investing, and moneylending. 11 *I-:- :-&-A ---- -- -- :&
LL ula ILILCLLCICIILC wlih cummodity pices, wage rates, and interest
rates includes all prices, wage rates, and interest rates, it is tantamount
to the fulI substitution of socialism (of the German pattern) for the
market economy. Then the market, interpersonal exchange, private
ownership of the means of production, entrepreneurship, and private
initiative, virtually disappear altogether. No individual any longer has
the opportunity to influence the process of production of his own
accord; every individual is bound to obey the orders of the supreme
board of production management. What in the complex of these
orders are called prices, wage rates, and interest rates are no longer 
Interference with the Strncture of Prices 753
prices, wage rates, and interest rates in the catallactic sense of these
terms. They are merely quantitative determinations fixed by the
director without reference to a market process. If the governments
resorting to pricc control and the reformers advocating pricc control
were always intent upon the establishment of socialism of the German
pattern, there would be no need for economics to deal with rice control
separately. All that has to be said with reference to such price
control is already contained in the analysis of sociaIism.
Many advocates of government interference with prices have been
and are very much confused with regard to this issue. They have
failed to recognize the fundamental difference between a market
economy and a nonmarket society. The haziness of their ideas has
been reflected in vague and ambiguous language and in a bewildered
terminology. They have tried to amalgamate things entirely incornpatible
with one another. Their main concepts arc examples of the
inconsistency which logicians call contradictio in adjecto.
However, there were and are advocates of price control who have
openly declared that they want to preserve the market economy.
They are outspoken in their assertion that govcrnment fixing of prices,
wage rates, and intercst rates can attain the ends the govcrnment wants
to attain by their promulgation without abolishing altogether the
market and private ownership of the means of production. They even
declare that price control is the best or the only means of preserving
the system of private enterprise and of preventing the coming of
socialism. They become very indignant if somebody questions the
correctness of their doctrine and shows that price control, if it is
not to make things worse from the point of view of the governments
and the intervcntionist doctrinaires, must finally result in socialism.
They protest that they are neither socialists nor communists, and that
they aim at economic freedom and not at totalitarianism.
It is the tenets of these iilterventionists that we havc to examine.
The problem is whcther it is possible for the police power to attain
the ends it wants to attain by fixing prices, wage rates, and interest
rates at a height different from what the unhampered matket would
have determined. It is beyond doubt that a strong and resolute government
has the power to decree such maximum or ~ninimum rates and to
take revenge upon the disobedient. But the question is whcther or
not the authority can attain those ends which it wants to attain by resorting
to such decrees.
History is a long record of price ceilings and anti-usury laws.
Again and again emperors, kings, and revolutionary dictators have
tried to meddle with the market phenomena. Severe punishment was 
754 Huiwan Action
inflicted on refractory dealers and farmers. Many people fell victim
to persecutions whidh met with the enthusiastic approd of the
masscs. Nonetheless, all these endeavors failed. The explanation which
thc writings of lawyers, theologians, and philosophers provided for
the failure was in full agreement with the ideas held by the rulers and
the nlasses. Man, they said, is intrinsically selfish and sinful, and thc
authorities were unfdrtunately too lax in enforcing the law. What was
needed was more firmness and peremptoriness on the part of those in
power.
Cognizance of the issue involved was first reached with regard to
a special problem. Various governments long practiced currency debasement.
Thcy substituted baser and cheaper metals for a part of the
gold or silver which the coins previously contained, or they reduced
thc weight and the size of the coins. But they retained for the debased
coins the customary names of the old ones and decreed that they
should be given and received at the nominal par. Then iater the
governments tried to enjoin on their subjects analogous constraint with
regard to the exchange ratio between gold and silver and that between
metallic money and credit money or fiat money. In searching for the
causes which made all such dccrces abortive, the forerunners of
economic thought had already discovered by the last centuries of the
Middle Ages the regularity which was later called Gresham's Law.
There was still a long way to go from this isolated insight to the point
where the philosophers of the eighteenth century became aware of
the interconnectedness of all market phenomena.
In describing the results of their reasoning the classical economists
and their successors sometimes resorted to idiomatic expressions which
could easily be misinterpreted by those who wanted to misinterpret
them. They occasionally spoke of the "impossibility" of price control.
What they rcally meant was not that such decrees are impossible, but
that they cannot attain those ends which the governments are trying
to attain and that they make things worse, not better. They concluded
that such decrees are contrary to purpose and inexpedient.
It is necessary to see clearly that the problem of price control is
not merely one of the problems to be dealt with by economics, not
a problem with regard to which there can arise disagreement among
various economists. The issue involved is rather: Is there any such
thing as economics? Is there any regularity in the sequence and interconnectedness
of the market phenomena? He who answers these two
questions in the ncgative denies the very possibility, rationality, and
existence of economics as a branch of ltnowlcdge. He returns to the
bclicfs held in the ages which preceded the evolution of economics. 
interference with the Structu~e of Prices 755
He declares to be untrue the assertion that there is any economic law
and that prices, wage rates, and interest rates are uniquely determined
by the data of the market. He contends that the police have the power
to determine these market phenomena ad libitum. An advocate of
socialjsm need not necessarily negate economics; his postulates do not
necessarily imply the indeterminateness of the market phenomena.
But the interventionist, in advocating price control, cannot help nullifying
the very existence of economics. Nothing is left of economics
if one denies the law of the market.
The German Historical School was consistent in its radical condemnation
of economics and in its endeavors to substitute wirtschaftliche
Staatswissenschaften (the economic aspects of political science)
for economics. So were many adepts of British Fabianism and Am~rican
Institutionalism. But those authors who do not totally reject
economics and yet assert that price control can attain the ends sought
lamentably contradict themselves. It is logically impossible to reconcile
the point of view of the econonlist and that of the interventionist.
If prices are uniquely determined by the market data, they cannot
be freely manipulated by government compulsion. The government's
decree is just a new datum, and its effects are determined by the operation
of the market. It need not necessarily produce those results which
the govcrnrnent wants to realize in resorting to it. It may happen that
the final outcome of the interference is, from the point of view of
the government's intention, even more undesirable than the previous
state of affairs which the government wanted to alter.
One does not invaIidate these propositions by putting the term
economic law in quotation marks and by finding fault with the notion
of the law. In speaking of the laws of nature we have in mind the
fact that there prevails an inexorable interconnectedness of physical
and biological phenomena and that acting man must submit to this
regularity if he wants to succeed. In speaking of the laws of human
action we refer to the fact that such an inexorable interconnectedness
of phenomena is present also in the field of human action as such and
that acting man must recognize this regularity too if he wants to succeed.
The reality of the laws of praxeology is revealed to man by the
same signs that reveal the reality of natural law, namely, the fact that
his power to attain his ends is restricted and conditioned. In the absence
of laws man would either be omnipotent and would never feel any
uneasiness which he could not remove instantly and totally, or he
could not act at all.
These laws of the universe must not be confused with the man-made
laws of the country and with man-made moral precepts. The laws of 
756 Hurnan Action
the universe about which physics, biology, and praxeology provide
knowledge are independent of the human will, they are primary ontological
facts rigidly restricting man's power to act. The moial prccepts
and the laws of the country are means by which men seek to
attain certain ends. Whether or not these ends can really be attained
this way depends on the laws of the universe. The man-made laws arc
suitable if they are fit to attain these ends and contrary to purpose
if they are not. They are open to examination from the point of view
of their suitableness or unsuitableness. With regard to the laws of the
universe any doubt of their suitableness is supererogatory and vain.
They are what they arc and take care of themselves. Their violation
penalizes itself. But the man-made laws need to be enforced by special
sanctions.
Only the insane venture to disregard physical and biological laws.
But it is quite common to disdain economic laws. Rulers do not like
to admit that their power is restricted by any laws other than those
of physics and biology. They never ascribe their failures and frustrations
to the violation of economic law.
Foremost in the repudiation of economic knowledge was the German
Historical School. It was an unbearable idea to these professors
that their lofty idols, the Hohenzollern Electors of Brandenburg and
Kings of Prussia, should have lacked ornnipotcnce. To refute the
teachings of the economists, they buried themselves in old documents
and compiled numerous volumes dealing with the history of the administration
of these glorious princes. This, they wrote, is a realistic
approach to thc problems of statc and government. Here you find
unadulterated facts and real life, not the bloodless abstractions and
faulty generalizations of the British doctrinaires. In truth, all that these
ponderous tomes report is a long record of policies and measures
which failed precisely because of their neglect of economic law. x~
more instructive case history could ever be written than these Actn
Rorussica.
Eowever, ec~mmics c=mr accuiesce 1 i:: mch exemi;!ifica;ioi;. It
must enter into a precise scrutiny of the mode in which the market
reacts to government interference with the price structure.
2. The Market's Reaction to Government Interference
The characteristic feature of the market price is that it equalizes
supply and demand. The size of the demand coincides with the size of
supply not onIy in the imaginary construction of the evenly rotating
economy. The notion of the plain state of rest as developed by the 
Interference with the Structure of Prices 757
elementary theory of prices is a faithful description of what comes
to pass in the market at every instant. Any deviation of a market price
from the height at which supply and demand are equal is-in the unhampered
market-self-liquidating.
But if the government fixes prices at a height different from what
the market would have fixed if left alone, this equilibrium of demand
and supply is disturbed. Then there are-with maximum prices-potential
buyers who cannot buy although they are ready to pay the
price fixed by the authority, or even a higher price. Then there arewith
minimum prices-potential sellers who cannot sell although they
are ready to sell at the price fixed by the authority, or even at a lower
price. The price can no longer segregate those potential buyers and
sellers who can buy or sell from those who cannot. A different
principle for rhe allocation of the goods and services concerned and
for the selection of those who are to receive portions of the supply
available necessarily comes into operation. It may be that only those
are in a position to buy who come first, or only those to whom particular
circumstances (such as personal connections) assign a privileged
position, or only those ruthless fellows who chase away their rivals
by resorting to intimidation or violence. If the authority does not
want chance or violence to determine the allocation of the supply
available and conditions to become chaotic, it must itself regulate the
amount which each individuaI is permitted to buy. It must resort to
rationing."
But rationing does not affect the core of the issue. The allocation
of portions of the supply already produced and available to the various
individuals eager to obtain a quantity of the goods concerned is only
a secondary function of the market. Its primary function is the direction
of production. It directs the employment of the factors of production
into those channels in which they satisfy the most urgent
needs of the consumers. If the government's price ceiling refers only
to one consumers' good or to a limited amount of consumers' goods
while the prices of the complementary factors of production are left
free, production of the consumers1 goods concerned will drop. The
marginal producers will discontinue producing them lest they suffer
losses. The not absolutely specific factors of production will be employed
to a greater extent for the production of other goods not
subject to price ceilings. A greater part of the absolutely specific
factors of production will remain unused than would have remained
I. For the sake of simplicity we deal in the further disquisitions of this section
only with maximum prices for commodities and in the next section only with
minimum wage rates. However, our statements are, mutatis mutandis, equally
valid for minimum prices for commodities and maximum wage rates. 
758 Human Action
in the absence of price ceilings. There emerges a tendency to shift
production activities from the production of the goods affected by
the maximum prices into the production of other goods. This outcome
is, however, manifestly contrary to the intentions of the government.
In resorting to price ceilings the authority wanted to make the
commodities concerned more easily accessible to the consumers. It
considered precisely those commodities so vital that it singled them
out for a special measure in order to make it possible even for poor
people to be amply supplied with them. But the result of the government's
interference is that production of these commodities drops
or stops altogether. It is a complete failure.
It would be vain for the government to try to remove these undesired
consequences by decreeing maximum prices likewise for the
factors of production needed for the production of the consumers'
goods the prices of which it has fixed. Such a measure would be successful
only if all factors of production required were absolutely
specific. As this can never be the case, the government must add to
its first measure, fixing the price of only one consumers' good below
the potential market price, more and more price ceilings, not only for
all other consumers' goods and for all material factors of production,
but no less for labor. It must compel every entrepreneur, capitalist,
and employee to continue producing at the prices, wage rates, and
interest rates which the government has fixed, to produce those
quantities which the government orders them to produce, and to sell
the products to those people-producers or consumers-whom the
government determines. If one branch of production were to be
exempt from this regimentation, capital and labor would flow into it;
production would be restricted precisely in those other-regimented
-branches which the government considered so important that it
interfered with the conduct of their affairs.
Economics does not say that isolated government interference with
the prices of only one commodity or a few commodities is unfair,
bad, or unfeasibie. it says that such interference produces resuits
contrary to its purpose, that it makes conditions worse, not better,
from the point of view of the government and those backing ks interf
erence. Before the government interfered, the goods concerned were,
in the eyes of the government, too dear. As a result of the maximum
price their supply dwindles or disappears altogether. The government
interfered because it considered these commodities especially vital,
necessary, indispensable. But its action curtailed the supply available.
It is therefore, from the point of view of the government, absurd and
nonsensical. 
Interference with the Structure of Prices 7 59
If the government is unwilling to acquiesce in this undesired and
undesirable outcome and goes further and further, if it fixes the prices
of all goods and services of all orders and obliges a11 people to continue
producing and working at these prices and wage rates, it eliminates
the market altogether. Then the planned economy, socialism of the
German Zwangs~vimchaft pattern, is substituted for the market
economy. The consumers no longer direct production by their buying
and abstention from buying; the government alone directs it.
There are only two exceptions to the rule that maximum prices
restrict supply and thus bring about a state of affairs which is contrary
to the ai~ns sought by their imposition. One refers to absolute rent,
the other to monopoly prices.
The maximum price results in a restriction of supply because the
marginal producers suffer losses and must discontinue production.
The nonspecific factors of production are employed for the production
of other products not subject to price ceilings. The utilization of
the absolutely specific factors of production shrinks. Under unhampered
market conditions they would have been utilized up to the
limit determined by the absence of an opportunity to use the nonspecific
among the complementary factors for the satisfaction of more
urgent wants. Now only a smaller part of the available supply of these
absolutely specific factors can be utilized; concomitantly that part of
the supply that remains unused increases. But if the supply of these absolutely
specific factors is so scanty that under the prices of the unhampered
market their total supply was utilized, a margin is given
within which the government's interference does not curtail the
supply of the product. The maximum price does not restrict production
as long as it has not entirely absorbed the absolute rent of the
marginal supplier of the absolutely specific factor. But at any rate it
results in a discrepancy between the demand for and the supply of
the product.
Thus the amount by which the urban rent of a piece of land exceeds
the agricuiturai rent provides a margin in which rent control can
operate without restricting the supply of rental space. If the maximum
rents are graduated in such a way as never to take away from any
proprietor so much that he prefers to use the land for agriculture
rather than for the construction of buildings, they do not affect the
supply of apartments and business premises. However, they increase
the demand for such apartments and premises and thus create the
very shortage that the governments pretend to fight by their rent
ceilings. Whether or not the authorities resort to rationing the space
availabIe is catallacticalIy of minor importance. At any rate, their 
760 Human Action
price ceilings do not abolish the catallactic phenomenon of the urban
rent. They merely transfer the rcnt from the landlord's income into
the tenant's income.
In practice, of course, governments resorting to rent restriction
never adjust their ceilings to these considerations. They either rigidly
freeze gross rents as they prevailed on the eve of their interference or
allow only a lirnited addition to these gross rents. As the proportion
between the two items included in the gross rent, urban rent proper
and price paid for thc utilization of the superstructure, varies according
to the special circumstances of each dwelling, the effect of the
rent ceilings is also very different. In some cases the expropriation of
the owner to the benefit of the renter involves only a fraction of the
difference between the urban rcnt and the agricultural rent; in other
cases it far cxceeds this difference. But however this may be, the
rent restriction creates a housing shortage. It increases demand without
increasing supply.
If maximum rents are decreed not only for already available rental
spacc, but also for buildings still to be constructed, the construction
of new buildings is no longer remunerative. It either stops altogether
or slumps to a low level; the shortage is perpetuated. But even if rents
in new buildings are left free, construction of new buildings drops.
Prospective investors are deterred because they cake into account the
danger that the government will at a later date declare a new emergcncy
and expropriate a part of their revenues in the same way as it
did with the old buildings.
The second exception refers to monopoly prices. The difference
between a monopoIy price and the competitive price of the commodity
in question provides a margin in which maximum prices could
be enforced without defeating the ends sought by the government. If
the competitive pricc is p and the lowest among the possible monopoly
prices nz) a ceiling price of c, c being lower than m, would make it
disadvantageous for the seller to raisc the price above p. The maximum
price would reescabiish the competitive pricc and increase demand,
production, and the supply offered for sale. A dim cognizance of this
concatenation is at the bottom of some suggcstions asking for government
interference in order to preserve co~npetition and to make it
operate as beneficially as possible.
We may for the sake of argument pass over the fact that all such
proposals are unrealistic with regard to all those instances of rnonopoly
prices which are the outcome of government interference. If the
government objccts to monopoly prices for ncw inventions, it should
stop granting patents, It would be absurd to grant patents and then 
Interference with the Stmcture of Prices 761
to deprive them of any value by forcing the patentee to sell at the
competitive price. If the government does not approve of cartels,
it should rather abstain from all measures (such as import duties)
which provide business with the opportunity to erect combines.
Things arc ditferent in those instances in which monopoly prices
come into existence without assistance from the governments. Here
governmental maximum priccs could reestablish competitive conditions
if it were possible to find out by academic computation at which
height a nonexisting competitive marlict would have determined the
price. That all endeavors to construct normarket prices are vain has
heen shown.' The unsatisfactory results of all attempts to determine
urhat the fair or correct price for the services of public utilities should
be are well known to all experts.
Reference to these two exceptions explains why in some rare cases
maximum prices, when applied with very great caution within a narI-ow
margin, do not restrict thc supply of the oornmodity or the service
concerned. It does not affect the correctness of the general rule that
maximum prices bring about a state of affairs which, from the point
of view of the government decreeing them, is more undesirable than
conditions as they would have been in the abscnce of price control.
Observations on the Causes of the Decline of Ancient Civilization
Knowledge of the effects of government interference with market prices
makes us comprehend the economic causes of a momentous historical
event, the decline of ancient civilization.
It may be Ieft undecided whether or not it is correct to call the economic
organization of the Roman Empire capitalism. At any rate it is certain
that the Roman Empire in the second century, the age of the Antonines,
the "good" emperors, had reachcd a high stage of the social division of
labor and of interregional commerce. Several metropolitan centers, a
considerable number of middle-sized towns, and many small towns were
the seats of a refined civilization. The inhabitants of these urban agglomerations
were supplied with food and raw materials not onIy from the
neighboring rural districts, but also from distant provinces. A part of
these provisions flowed into the cities as revenue of their wealthy residents
who owned landed property. But a considerable part u7as bought in exchange
for the rural population's purchases of the products of the citydwellers'
processing activities. There was an extensive trade between the
various regions of the vast empire. Not only in the processing industries,
but also in agricuiture there was a tendency toward further specialization.
The various parts of the empire were no longer econon~ically self-sufficient.
They were mutually interdependent.
What brought about the decline of the empire and the decay of its
2. Cf. above, pp. 392-394. 
762 Human Action
civilization was the disintegration of this econonlic interconnectedness,
not the barbarian invasions. The alien aggressors merely took advantage
of an opportunity which the internal weakness of the empire offered to
them. From a military point of view the tribes which invaded the empire
in the fourth and fifth centuries were not more formidable than the
armies which the legions had easily defeated in earlier times. But the
empire had changed. Its economic and social structure was already
medieval.
The freedom that Rome granted to commerce and trade had always
been restricted. With regard to the marketing of cereals and other vital
necessities it was even more restricted than with regard to other commodities.
It was deemed unfair and immoral to ask for grain, oil, and wine, the
staples of these ages, more than the customary prices, and the municipal
authorities were quick to check what they considered profiteering. Thus
the evolution of an eficient wholesale trade in these commodities was prevented.
The policy of the annonn, which was tantamount to a nationalization
or municipalization qf the grain trade, aimed at filling the gaps. But
its effects were rather unsatisfactory. Grain was scarce in the urban agglomerations,
and the agriculturists complained about the unremunerativeness
of grain gro~ing.~ The interference of the authorities upset the adjustment
of supply to the rising demand.
The showdown came when in the political troubles of the third and
fourth centuries the emperors resorted to currency debasement. With
the system of maximum prices the practice of debasement completely
paralyzed both the production and the marketing of the vital foodstuffs
and disintegrated society's economic organization. The more eagerness the
authorities displayed in enforcing the maximum prices, the more desperate
became the conditions of the urban masses dependent on the purchase of
food. Commerce in grain and other necessities vanished altogether. To
avoid starving, people deserted the cities, settled on the countryside, and
tried to grow grain, oil, wine, and other necessities for thcmselvcs. On the
other hand, the owners of the big estates restricted their excess production
of cereals and began to produce in their farmhouses-the villae-the products
of handicraft which they needed. For their big-scale farming, which
was already serio~lsly jeopardized hecause of the Inefficiency of slave
labor, lost its rationality completely when the opportunity to sell at remunerative
prices disappeared. As the owner of the estate could no longer
seIl in the cities, he could no longer patronize the urban artisans either.
He was forced to look for a substitute to meet his needs by employing
handicraftsmen on his own account in his villa. He discontinued big-scale
farming and became a landlord receiving rents from tenants or sharecroppers.
These coloni were either freed slaves or urban proletarians who
settled in the villages and turned to tilling the soil. A tendency toward the
establishment of autarky of each landlord's estate emerged. The cconomic
3. Cf. Rostovtzeff, The Social and Economic History of the Ronzan Empire
(Oxford, 1926), p. 187. 
Interference with the Structure of Prices 763
function of the cities, of commerce, trade, and urban handicrafts, shrank.
Italy and the provinces of the empire returned to a less advanced state of
the social division of labor. The highly developed economic structure of
ancient civilization retrograded to what is now known as the manorial
organization of the Middle Ages.
The emperors were alarmed with that outcome, which undermined the
financial and military power of their government. But their counteraction
was futile as it did not affect the root of the evil. The compulsion and
coercion to which they resorted could not reverse the trend toward social
disintegration which, on the contrary, was caused precisely by too much
compulsion and coercion. No Roman was aware of the fact that the process
was induccd by the government's interference with prices and by currency
debasement. It was vain for the emperors to promulgate laws
against the city-dweller who "relicta chitate rus habitare maluerit." The
system of the leiturgia, the public services to be rendered by the wealthy
citizens, only accelerated the retrogression of the division of labor. The
laws concerning the special obligations of the shipowners, the navicularii,
were no more successful in checking the decline of navigation than thc
laws concerning grain dealing in checking the shrinkage in the cities'
supply of agricultural products.
The marvelous civilization of antiquity perished because it did not adjust
its moral code and its legal system to the requirements of the market
economy. A social order is doomed if the actions which its normal functioning
rcquires are rejected by the standards of morality, are dedared
iI1egal by the laws of the country, and are prosecuted as criminal by the
courts and the police. The Roman Etnpire crumbled to dust because it
lacked the spirit of liberalism and free enterprise. The policy of interventionism
and its political corollary, the Fiihrer principle, decomposed the
mighty empire as they will by necessity always disintegrate and destroy
any social entity.
3. Minimum Wage Rates
The very essence of the interventionist politicians' wisdom is to
raise the price of labor either by government decree or b\; violent
action on the part of labor unions. To raise wage rates above the
height at which the unhampered market would determine them is
considered a postulate of the eternal laws of morality as well as indispensable
from the economic point of view. ~hoe;er dares to challenge
this ethicaI and economic dogma is scorned both as depraved
and ignorant. Man\; of our contemporaries look upon people who
are foolhardy cnouih "to cross a picket line" as primitive tribesmen
looked upon those who violated the precepts of taboo conceptions.
Millions are jubilant if such scabs receive their well-dcscrvccl punish-
4. Corpus Juris Civilis, 1. un. C. X. 37. 
764 Human Action
ment from the hands of the strikers while the police, the public
attorneys, and the penal courts preserve a lofty neutrality.
The market wage rate tends toward a height at which all those eager
to earn wages get jobs and all those eager to employ workers can hire
as many as they want. It tends toward the cstablishnlent of what is
nowadays called full employment. Whcrc there is neither government
nor union interfercncc with the lal~or market, there is only
voluntary or catallactic unemployment. But as soon as external pressure
and cornpulsion, be it on the part of the government or on the
part of the unions, tries to fix wage rates at a higher point, institutional
unemployment emerges. While there prcvails on the unhampered
labor market a tcndcncy for catallactic unemployment to disappear,
institutional unemployment cannot disappear as long as the government
or the unions arc successful in the enforcement of their fiat.
If the minimum wage rate refers only to a part of the various occupations
while other sectors of the labor market arc left free, those
losing thcir jobs on its account enter the free branches of business
and increase the supply of labor in them. When unionism was restricted
to skilled labop mainly, the wage rise achieved by the unions
did not lead to institutional unemployment. It merely lowered the
height of wage rates in those branches in which there were no efficient
unions or no unions at all. 'The corollary of the rise in wages for organized
workers was a drop in wages for unorganized workers. But
with the spread of govcrnment intcrfcrcnce with wages and with
government support of unionism, conditions have changed. Institutional
unenlployment has become a chronic or permanent mass
phenomcnon.
Writing in 1930. T,ord Beveridge, now an enthusiastic advocate of
government and union mccldling with the labor market, pointed out
that the potential effect of "a high-wages policy" in causing unempIoyment
is "not dcnied by any competent authority." "n fact, to
denv this cffcct is tantamount to a complete disavowal of any regularity
;n the sequence and interconnectcdncss of market phenomena.
Those earlier economists who sympathized with the unions were fully
aware of the fact that unionization can achieve its ends only when
rcstricted to a minority of worlters. They approved of unionism as
a device bcneficial to the group interests of a privileged labor aristocracv,
and did not concern thcrnselves about its consequences for
the rest of the wage ~arncrs.~ No onc has ever succeeded in the effort
5. Cf. W. 11. Revcridgc, Full Enzplogment in a Free Society (London, 194~1,
pp. 362-37'.
6. Cf, Hutt, The Theory of Collective Bargaining pp. IC-21. 
Interference with the St~z~ct~re of Prices 765
to demonstrate that unionism could improve the conditions and raise
the standard of living of all those eager to earn wages.
It is important to remember also that Karl Marx did not contend
that unions could raise the average standard of wages. As he saw it,
"the general tendency of capitalistic production is not to raise, but
to sink the average standard of wages." Such being the tendency of
things, all that unionism can achieve with regard to wages is "making
the best of the occasional chances for their temporary improvement."
* The unions counted for Marx only as far as they attacked
"the very system of wage slavery and present-day methods of production."
* They should understand that "instead of the conservative
motto, A fair day's wages for n fair day's work! they ought to inscribe
on their banner the revolutionary watchword, ~bdlition ofthe wages
system." Tonsistent Marxiam always opposed atrempts to impose
minimum wage rates as detrimental to the interests of the whole labor
class. From the beginning of the modern labor movement there was
always an antagonism between the unions and the revolutionary socialists.
The older British and American unions were exclusively
dedicated to the enforcement of higher wage rates. They looked
askance upon socialism, "utopian" as well as "scientific." In ~errnan~
there was a rivalry between the adepts of the Marxian creed and the
union leaders. Finally, in the last decades preceding the outbreak of
the first World War, the uniom triumphed. They virtually converted
the Social Democratic Party to the principles of interventionism and
unionism. In France, Georges Sore1 aimed at imbuing the unions with
that spirit of ruthless aggression and revolutionary bellicosity which
hlarx wanted to impart to them. There is today in every nonsocialist
country a manifest conflict between two irreconcilabIe factions within
the unions. One group considers unionism a device for the improvement
of the workers' conditions within the frame of capitalism. The
other group wants to drive the unions into the ranks of militant communism
and approves of them only as far as they are the pioneers of a
violent overthrow of the capitalistic system.
The problems of labor unionism have been obfuscated and utterly
confused by pseudo-humanitarian blather. The advocates of minimum
wage rates, whether decreed and enforced by the government or by
violent union action, contend that they are fighting for the improvement
of the conditions of the working masses. They do not permit
anyone to question their dogma that minimum wage rates are the
7. Cf. Marx, Value, Price and Profit, ed. E. Marx hveling (Chicago, Charles
H. Kerr & Company), p. 125.
8. Cf. A. Lozovsky, Marx and the Trade Unions (New York, rg35), p. 17.
9, Cf. Marx, op. cit., pp. 126127. 
766 Human Action
only appropriate means of raising wage rates permanently and for
all those eager to earn wages. They pride themselves on being the only
true friends of "labor," of the "common man," of "progress," and
of the eternal principles of "social justice."
However, the problem is precisely whether there is any means for
raising the standard of living of all those eager to work other than
raising the marginal productivity of labor by accelerating the increase
of capital as compared with population. The union doctrinaires are
intent upon obscuring this primary issue. They never refer to the
only point that matters, viz., the relation between the number of
workers and the quantity of capital goods available. But certain
policies of the unions involve a tacit acltnow-ledgmcnt of the correctness
of the catallactic theorems concerning the determination of
wage rates. Unions are anxious to cut down the supply of labor by
anti-immigration laws and by preventing outsiders and newcomers
from competing in the unionized sectors of the labor market. They
are opposed to the export of capital. These policies would be nonsensicaI
if it were true that the per capita quota of capital available
is of no importance for determination of wage rates.
The essence of the union doctrine is implied in the slogan exploitation.
According to the union variety of the exploitation doctrine,
which differs in some points from the Marxian creed, labor is the only
source of wealth, and expenditure of labor the only real costs. By
rights, all proceeds from the sale of products should belong to the
workers. The worker has a fair claim to the whole produce of labor.
The wrong that the capitalistic mode of production does to the worker
consists in the fact that it permits landowners, capitalists, and entrepreneurs
to withhold a part of the workers' portion. The share which
goes to these parasites is unearned income. It is manifestly a predatory
revenue, a theft. The workers are right in their endeavors to raise
wage rates step by step to such a height that finally nothing will be
left for the support of a class of idle and socially useless exploiters.
in aiming at this end, they continue the battie whlch earlier generations
fought for the emancipation of slaves and serfs and for the abolition
of the imposts, tributes, tithes, and unpaid statute labor with
which the peasantry was burdened for the benefit of aristocratic
landlords. The labor movement is a struggle for freedom and equality,
and for the vindication of the inalienable rights of man. Its ultimate
victory is beyond doubt, for it is the inevitable trend of historical
evolution to wipe out all class privileges and to establish firmly the
realm of freedom and equality. The attempts of reactionary employers
to halt progress are doomed. 
Interference with the Swucture of Prices 767
Such are the tenets of present-day social doctrine. It is true that
some people, although in perfect agreement with its philosophical
ideas, support the practical conclusions derived by the radicals only
wirh certain reservations and qualifications. Thesc moderates do not
propose to abolish "management's" share alcogcther; they would be
satisfied with cutting it down to a "fair" amount. As the opinions
concerning the fairness of the revenues of the entreprcneurs and
capitalists vary widely, the difference betwcen the point of view of
the radicals and that of the moderates is of little moment. The moderates
also endorse the principle that real wage rates should always rise
and never drop. In both world wars few voices in the United Statcs
disputed the claim of the unions that the wage earners' take-home
pay, even in a national emergency, should go up faster than the cost
of living.
All these sentimental disquisitions leave out of consideration the
problems that mattcr, viz., the economic aspects of the issue. They
take no notice of institutional unemployment, the inescapable result
of raising wage rates above the height determincd by the unhampercd
market.
As the union doctrine sees it, there is no harm in confiscating the
specific revenue of the capitalists and entrepreneurs partially or altogether.
In dealing with this issue they speak of profits in the sense in
which the classical economists applied this term. They do not distinguish
between entrepreneurial profit, interest on the capital employed,
and compensation for the technical services rendered by the entrepreneur.
We will deal later with the consequences resulthg from the
confiscation of interest and profits and with the syndicalist elements
involved in the "ability to pay" principle and in profit-sharing
schemes.1 We have examined the purchasing power argument as
advanced in favor of a policy of raising wage rates above the potential
market rates.ll What remains is to scrutinize thc purport of the alleged
Ricardo effect.
Ricardo is the author of the proposition that a rise in wages wiIl
encourage capitalists to substitute machinery for labor and vice versa.'"
Hence, concludc the union apologists, a of raising wage rates,
irrespective of what thcy would have been on the unhampercd labor
market, is always beneficial. It gencratcs technological improvement
and raises thc productivity of labor. Higher wages always pay for
I o. Cf. below, pp. 800-816.
I I. Cf. above, pp. 298-299.
12. Cf. Ricardo, Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, chap. i, sec. V.
The term "Ricardo effect" is used by Hayek, Profits, lnterest and Investment
(London, 1939), p. 8. 
768 Hzcwzan Action
themselves. In forcing the reluctant employers to raise wage rates,
the unions become the pioneers of progress and prosperity.
Many economists approve of the Ricardian proposition although
few of them are consistent enough to endorse the inference the union
apologists draw from it. The Ricardo effect is by and large a stockin-trade
of popular economics. Nonetheless, the theorem involved is
one of the worst economic fallacies.
The confusion starts with the misinterpretation of the statement
that machinery is "substituted" for labor. What happens is that labor
is rendered more efficient by the aid of machinery. The same input
of labor leads to a greater quantity or a better quality of products.
The employment of machinery itself does not directly result in a
reduction df the number of hands employed in the production of
the article A concerned. What brings about this secondary effect is
the fact that-other things being equal-an increase in the available
supply of A lowers the marginal utility of a unit of A as against that
of the units of other articles and that therefore labor is withdrawn
from the production of A and employed in the turning out of other
articles. The technological improvement in the production of A makes
it possible to realize certain projects which could not be executed before
because the workers required were employed for the production
of A for which consumers7 demand was more urgent. The reduction
of the number of workers in the A industry is caused by the increased
demand of these other branches to which the opportunity to expand
is offered. Incidentally, this insight explodes all talk about "technological
unemployment."
Tools and machinery are primarily not labor-saving devices, but
means to increase output per unit of input. They appear as laborsaving
devices if looked upon exclusivcly from the point of view of
the individual branch of business concerned. Seen from the point of
view of the consumers and the whole of society, they appear as instruments
that raise the productivity of human effort. They increase
supp!j. aiid make it possible to comiiiiie more n~atclrial and to
enjoy more leisure. Which goods will bc consumed in greater quantity
and to what extent people will prefer to enjoy more leisure depends on
people's value judgments.
The employment of more and better tools is feasible only to the
extent that the capital required is available. Saving-that is, a surplus
of production over consumption-is the indispensable condition of
every further step toward technological improvement. Mere technologicaI
knowledge is of no use if the capita1 needed is lacking. Chinese 
Interference mitt3 the Structure of Prices
businessmen are familiar with American ways of production. What
prevents them from adopting the American mcthods is not the lowness
of Chinese wages, but lack of capital.
On the other hand, capitalist saving necessarily causes employment
of additional tools and machinery. The role that plain saving, i.e., the
piling up of stocks of consumers' goods as a reserve for rainy days,
plays in the market economy is negligible. Under capitalism saving is
as a rule capitalist saving. The excess of production over consumption
is invested either directly in the saver's own business or farm or indirectly
in othcr ~eo~lcs' enterprises through the instrumentality of
savings deposits, common and preferred stock, bonds, debentures, and
mortgages.'To the extent to which people keep their consumption
below their net income, additional capital is created and at the same
timc crnploved for thc expansion of the capital equipment of the
apparatus of production. As has been pointed out, this outcome cannot
be affected by any synchronous tendency toward an increase in
cash holdings.14 On one hand, what is unconditionally needed for the
employment of more and better tools is additional accumulation of
capital. On the other hand, there is no employment available for
additional capital other than that provided by the application of more
and better tools.
Ricardo's proposition and the union doctrinc derived from it turn
things upside down. A tendency toward higher wage rates is not
the cause, but thc effect, of technological improvement. Profit-seeking
business is compelled to employ the most efficient methods of production.
What checks a businessman's endeavors to improve the equipment
of his firm is only lack of capital. If the capital rcquired is not
available, no meddling with wage rates can provide it.
All that minimum wage rates can accomplish with regard to the
einployment of machinery is to shift additional investment from one
hranch into another. T,et us assume that in an cconornically backward
country, Ruritania, the stevedores' union succeeds in forcing the
entrcprencurs to pay wage rates which are comparatively much higher
than those paid in the rest of the country's industries. Then it may
result that the most profitable employment for additional capital is
to utilize mechanical devices in the 1bading and unloading of ships.
But the capital thus employed is withheld from other branchcs of
Ruritania's business in which, in the absence of the union's policy,
13. .4s we are dealing here with the conditions of the unhampered market economy,
we may disregard the capital-consuming effects of government borrowing.
14. See above, pp. 51y520. 
770 Human Action
it would have been employed in a more profitable way. The effect of
the high wages of the stevedores is not an increase, but a drop in
Ruritania's total production.'"
Real wage rates can rise only to the extent that, other things being
equal, capital becomes more plentiful. If the government or the
unions succeed in enforcing wage rates which are higher than those
the unhampered labor market would have determined, the supply
of labor exceeds the denland for labor. Institutional unen~ployment
emerges.
Firmly committed to the principles of interventionism, governments
try to check this undesired resuIt of their interference by resorting
to those measures which arc nowadays called full-ernploymcnt
policy: unemployment doles, arbitration of labor disputes: public
worlts by means of lavish public spending, inflation, and credit expansion.
A11 these remedies are worse than the evil they are designed
to remove.
Assistance granted to the unemployed does not dispose of unemployment.
It makes it easier for the unemployed to remain idle. The
nearer the allowance comes to the height at which the unhampered
markct would have fixed the wage rate, the less incentive it offers to
the beneficiary to look for a new job. It is a means of making unemployment
last rather than of malting it disappear. The disastrous
financial implications of unemployment benefits are manifest.
Arbitration is not an appropriate method for the settlement of
disputes concerning the height of wage rates. If the arbitrators' award
fixes wage rates exactly at the potential market rate or below that
rate, it is supererogatorv. If it fixes wage ratcs above the potential
market rate, the conseq;ences are the same that any other mode of
fixing minimum wagc rates above the market height brings about,
viz., institutional unemployment. It does not matter to what pretext
the arbitrator resorts in order to justify his decision. What matters
is not whether wages are "fair" or "unfair" by some arbitrary standard,
but whether they do or do not bring about an excess of suppi?
of labor over demand for labor. It may seem fair to some people to
fix wage rates at such a height that a great part of the potential labor
force is doomed to lasting unemployment. But nobody can assert
that it is expedient and beneficial to society.
If government spending is financed by taxing the citizens or borrowing
from them, the citizens' power to spend and invest is curtailed
15. The example is merely hypothetical. Such a powerful union would probably
prohibit the employment of mechanical deviccs in the loading and unloading
of ships in order to "create more jobs." 
lnte~ference with the Structure of Prices 771
to the same extent as that of the public treasury expands. No additional
jobs are created.
But if the government finances its spending program by inflationby
an increase in the quantity of money and by credit expansion-it:
causes a general cash-induced rise in the prices of all commodities and
services. If in the course of such an inflation the rise in wage rates
sufficientiy lags behind the rise in the prices of commodities, institutional
unemployment may shrink or disappear altogether. But what
makes it shrink or disappear is precisely the fact that such an outcome
is tantamount to a drop in real wage rates. Lord Keynes considered
credit expansion an efficient method for the abolition of unemployment;
he believed that "gradual and automatic lowering of real wages
as a result of rising prices" would not be so strongly resisted by labor
as any attempt to lower money wage rates.l0 However, the success of
such a cunning plan would require an unlikeIy degree of ignorance
and stupidity on the part of the wage earners. As long as workers
believe that minimum wage rates benefit them, they will not let themselves
be cheated by such clever tricks.
In practice all these devices of an alleged full employment policy
finally lead to the establishment of socialism of the German pattern.
As the members of an arbitration court whom the employers have
appointed and those whom the unions have appointed never agree
with regard to the fairness of a definite rate, the decision virtually
devolves upon the members appointed by the government. The power
to determine the height of wage rates is thus vested in the government.
The more public works expand and the more the government
undertakes in order to fill the gap left by "private enterprise's inability
to provide jobs for all," the more the realm of private enterprise
shrinks. Thus we are again faced with the alternative of capitalism
or socialism. There cannot be any question of a lasting policy of
minimum wage rates.
The Catalloctic Aspects of Labor Unionism
The only catallactic problem with regard to labor unions is the question
of whether or not it is possible to raise by pressure and compulsion the
wage rates of a11 those eager to earn wages above the height the unhampered
market would have determined.
In all countries the labor unions have actually acquired the privilege
16. Cf. Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money
(London, r936), p. 264. For a critical examination of this idea see Albert IIahn,
Deficit Spending and Private Enterprise, Postwar Readjustments Bulletin No. 8,
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, pp. 28-29. About the success of the Keynesian
stratagem in the 'thirties, cf. below, pp. 786-787. 
772 Hunzan Action
of violent action. The governments have abandoned in their favor the
essential attribute of government, the exclusive power and right to resort
to violent coercion and compulsion. Of course, the laws which make it a
criminal offense for any citizen to resort-except in case of self-defenseto
violent action have not been formally repealed or amended. However,
actually labor union violence is tolerated within broad limits. The labor
unions are practically free to prevent by force anybody from defying their
orders concerning wage rates and other labor conditions. They are free to
inflict with impunity bodily evils upon strikebreakers and upon entrepreneurs
and mandataries of entrepreneurs who employ strikebreakers.
They are free to destroy property of such employers and even to injure
customers patronizing their shops. The authorities, with the approval of
public opinion, condone such acts. The police do not stop such offenders,
the state attorneys do not arraign them, and no opportunity is offered to
the penal courts to pass judgment on their actions. In excessive cases, if
the deeds of violence go too far, some lame and tinlid attempts at repression
and prevention are ventured. But as a rule they fail. Their failure is
sometimes due to bureaucratic inefficiency or to the insufficiency of the
means at the disposal of the authorities, but more often to the unwillingness
of the whole governmental apparatus to interfere successfully.
Such has been the state of affairs for a long tirne in all nonsocialist countries.
The economist in establishing these facts neither blames nor accuses.
He merely explains what conditions have given to the unions the power ro
enforce their minimum wage rates and what the real meaning of the term
collective bargaining is.
As union advocates explain the term collective bargaining, it merely
means the substitution of a union's bargaining for the individual bargaining
of the individual workers. In the fully developed market economy bargaining
concerning those commodities and services of which homogeneous
items are frequently bought and sold in great quantities is not effected by
the manner in which nonfungible con~modities and services are traded.
The buyer or seller of fungible consumers' goods or of fungible services
fixes a price tentatively and adjusts it later according to the response his
offer meets from those interested until he is in a position to buy or to sell as
much as he plans. Technically no other procedure is feasible. The department
store cannot haggle with its patrons. It fixes the price of an article
and waits. If the public does not buy sufficient quantities, it lowers the
price. A factory that needs five hundred welders fixes a wage rate which,
as it expects, will enable it to hire five hundred men. If only a minor number
turns up, it is forced to allow a higher rate. Every employer must raise
the wages he offers up to the point at which no competitor Iures the
workers away by overbidding. What makes the enforcement of minimum
wage rates futile is precisely the fact that with wages raised above this
point competitors do not turn up with a demand for labor big enough to
absorb the whole supply.
If the unions were really bargaining agencies, their collective bargain- 
Interference uith the Structure of Prices 773
ing could not raise the height of wage rates above the point of the unhampered
market. As long as there still are unemployed workers available,
there is no reason for an employer to raise his offer. Real collective bargaining
would not differ cataIlactically from individual bargaining. It
would, like individual bargaining, give a virtual voicc to those job-seekers
who have not yet found the jobs they are Iooking for.
However, what is euphemistically caIled collective bargaining by union
leaders and "pro-labor" legislation is of a quite different character. It is
bargaining at the point of a gun. It is bargaining between an armed party,
ready to use its weapons, and an unarmed party under duress. It is not a
market transaction. It is a dictate forced upon the employer. And its effects
do not differ from those of a government decree for the enforcement of
which the police power and the penal courts are used. It produces institutional
unemployment.
The treatment of the problems involved by public opinion and the vast
number of pseudo-economic writings is utterly misleading. The issue is
not the right to form associations. It is whether or not any association of
private citizens should be granted the privilege of resorting with impunity
to violent action. It is the same problem that relates to the activities of the
Ku Klux Klan.
hTeithcr is it correct to look upon the matter from the point of view of a
"right to strike." The problem is not the right to strike, but the right-by
intimidation or violence-to force other people to strike, and the further
right to prevent anybody from working in a shop in which a union has
caIled a strike. When the unions invoke the right to strike in justification
of such intimidation and deeds of violence, they are on no better ground
than a religious group would be in invoking the right of freedom of conscience
as a justification of persecuting dissenters.
When in the past the laws of some countries denied to employees the
right to form unions, they were guided by the idea that such unions have
no obj cctive other than to resort to violent action and intimidation. When
the authorities in the past sometimes directed their armed forces to protect
the employers, their mandataries, and their property against the onslaught
of strikers, they were not guilty of acts hostile to "labor." They simply did
what every government considers its main duty. They tried to preserve
their exclusive right to rcsort to violent action.
There is no need for economics to enter into an examination of the
problems of jurisdictional strikes and of various laws, especially of the
American New Deal, which wcre admittedly loaded against the employers
and which assigned a privileged position to the unions. There is
only one point that matters. If a government decree or labor union pressure
and compulsion fix wage rates above the height of the potential market
rates, institutional unemployment results. 
XXXI. CURREXCY AND CREDIT &IANIPULATION
1. The Government and the Currency
M EDIA of exchange and money are n~arltet phenomena. What
makes a thing a medium of exchange or money is the conduct
of parties to market transactions. An occasion for dealing with rnonctary
problems appears to the authorities in the same way in which they
concern themselves with all other objects exchanged, namely, when
they are called upon to decide whether or not the failure of one of the
parties to an act of exchange to comply with his contractual obligations
justifies compulsion on thc part of the government apparatus
of violent oppression. If both parties discharge their mutual obligations
instantly and synchronously, as a rule no conflicts arisc which
would induce one of the parties to apply to the judiciary. But if
one or both parties' obligations are ten~porally deferred, it may happen
that the courts are called to decide how the terms of the contract are
to be complied with. If payment of a sum of money is involved, this
implies the task of determining what meaning is to be attached to the
monetary terms used in the contract.
Thus it devolves upon the laws of the country and upon the courts
to define what the parties to the contract had in mind when speaking
of a sum of money and to establish how the obligation to pay such a
sum is to be settled in accordance with the terms agreed upon. They
have to determine what is and what is not legal tender. In attending
to this task the laws and the courts do not create money. A thing becomes
money only by virtue of the fact that those exchanging con+
n~odities and services commonly use it as a medium of exchange. in
the unhampered market economy the laws and the judges in attributing
legal tender quality to a certain thing merely establish what, according
to the usages of trade, was intended by the parties when they
referred in their deal to a definite kind of money. They interpret the
customs of the trade in the same way in which they proceed when
called to determine what is the meaning of any other terms used in
contracts.
Mintage has long been a prerogative of the rulers of the country.
However, this government activity had originally no objective other 
Currency and Credit Manipulation 775
than the stamping and certifying of weights and measures. The authority's
stamp placed upon a piece of metal was supposed to certify its
weight and fineness. When later princes resorted to substituting baser
and cheaper metals for a part of the precious metals while retaining
the customary face and name of the coins, they did it furtively and
in full awareness of the fact that they were engaged in a fraudulent
attempt to cheat the public. As soon as people found out these artifices,
the debased coins were dealt with at a discount as against the old
better ones. The governments reacted by resorting to compulsion
and coercion. They made it illegal to discriminate in trade and in the
settlement of deferred payments between "good" money and "bad"
money and decreed maximum prices in terms of "bad" money. However,
the result obtained was not that which the governmcnts aimed at.
Their decrees failed to stop the process which adjusted commodity
prices (in terms of the debased currency) to the actual state of the
money relation. Moreover, the effects appeared which Gresham's
Law describes.
The history of government interfercnce with currency is, however,
not merely a record of debasement practices and of abortive attempts
to avoid their inescapable catallactic consequences. There were
governments that did not look upon their mintage prerogative as a
means of cheating that part of the public who placed confidence in
their rulers' integrity and who, out of ignorance, were ready to accept
the debased coins at their face value. These governments considered
the manufacturing of coins pot as 3 source of surreptitious fiscal lucre
but as a public service designed to safeguard a smooth functioning of
the market. But even these governments-out of ignorance and dilettantism-often
resorted to measures which were tantamount to interference
with the price structure, although they were not deliberately
planned as such. As two precious mctals wek used side by side as
money, the authorities nai'vely hclieved that it was their task to unify
the currency system by decreeing a rigid exchange ratio between
gold and silver. The bimetallic system proved a complete failure.
It did not bring about bimetallism, but an alternating standard. That
metaI which, compared with the instantaneous state of the fluctuating
market exchange rate between gold and silver, was overvalued in
the legally fixed ratio, predominated in domestic circulation, while
the other mctal disappeared. Finally the governincnts abandoned their
vain attempts and acquiesced to monometallism. The present silver
purchase policy of the American Government is not seriously a device
of monetary policy. It is merely a device for raising the price of
silver for the benefit of the owners of silver mines, their employees, 
776 Human Action
and the states within whose boundaries the mines are located. It is
a hardly disguised subsidy. Its monetary significance consists exclusively
in the fact that it is financed by issuing additional dollar
notes whose legal tender quality does not differ essentially from that
of the Federal Reserve notes, although they bear the practically meaningless
imprint "Silver Certificate."
Yet economic history also provides instances of well-designed and
successful monetary policies on the part of governments whose only
intention was to equip their countries with a smoothly working currency
system. Laissez-faire liberalism did not abolish the traditional
government prerogative of mintage. But in the hands of the liberal
governments the character of this state monopoly was completely
altered. The ideas which considered it an instrument of interventionist
policies were discarded. No longer was it used for fiscal purposes
or for favoring some groups of the people at the expense of
other groups. The government's monetary activities aimed at one
objective only: to facilitate and to simplify the use of the medium of
exchange which the conduct of the people had made money. A nation's
currency system, it was agreed, should be sound. The principle
of soundness meant that the standard coins-ix., those to which